5 things we can all learn from Flaming Pianos by Ruth Amos 
If we finish on time, we have time for a Q&A. Let's hope she has time for Q&A. This is an awesome tool. It's so much fun.  As this is about flame flame, there are fire extinguishers right at the entrances, and in the middle at every pillar! Otherwise, I would ask you to give a very warm round of applause. 
>> Good afternoon. My name's Ruth. I'm an inventor. I don't have the flaming piano. I have lots of videos of the crazy things we build. I'm an inventor and engineer, and an occasional YouTuber. I fell into being an inventor, when I was younger, I wanted to be a lawyer, until I went to school, and my teacher set me the challenge to design some things to help his father go up and down his stairs. Overnight, I became an accidental inventor, won an engineering world, and got thrown into this whole world of engineering. It was a little bit overwhelming but I found there were amazing things in engineering that I loved to do, and I made it my mission. I met lots of other particularly women who would have been or wanted to be amazing engineers but actually didn't see themselves as being one. I made it my mission to do something about that. This is the product that I designed for my GCSE project. If you're on Facebook, it had a viral thing. 60 million people have seen it on Facebook recently which is bizarre. This was my first accidental invention. It started off simply with a toy which you can see and sat next to you. It's a metal stick and has a woodpecker. You flick it, and it goes down the stick. This isn't the exciting flaming piano bit. I'm giving you a background of that. From that toy that was my kind of lightbulb moment, and, with that and a drawing, and a few other stages in between, I ended up with a product that we sell across the UK and we license to America and Canada. It was a big moment to see something I had drawn become a proper product. That was made in a factory. Still seeing that process was totally eye-opening for me. It made me look at the world in a different way. To see something I had drawn on a sheet of paper become real and tangible was a really big moment. I very nearly didn't become an engineer. I spent a lot of time thinking about why that was, because I love engineering. I love making things, and I love problem-solving, and I never really saw myself in any of the engineers that I met until I was 17 or 18. I felt that was really sad, because, actually, if I had known earlier on, I've seen some amazing projects that some of the young people have been doing, and I'm, just like, "That could have been me." If I had known I wanted to be a engineer, and there are lots of other women who come from diverse background who don't see themselves as engineers, and it's really, really sad. I spent a lot of time going to very - don't use the word boring but more normal channels, so, being an ambassador, consulting, helping the government put their projects together. And I am realising this is being extreme. Some of the projects didn't show off how amazing making stuff is. We need to be showing young people how exciting makes things really is. Me and myself Sawn got thinking about this, and he won an award during his A-levels. That had been a big moment - designing something and seeing it come to life. We thought how can we do this for more young people? How can we show people that you can design and invent things that are actually tangible things. Seeing my product being made, I looked around the world in a completely different way. I was seeing how things were made and put together. I was thinking I could do that. I could design that. We thought how can we do that for our young people? Sawn and I had a simple idea. We wanted to take five to 11-years-old pictures and videos and set them a challenge, get them to send in their pictures and videos and choose one of their drawings or videos and bringing that invention to life. It is a simple concept which actually needed a little bit of backing. You all make things. You know it is expensive. I had to pitch this idea of right, I've got this idea for a YouTube chapel where we build kids' invention ideas, film it, put it online, and the idea is to encourage different kids who have never come across STEM to be makers and engineers. UI tube, a lot of people who have - all the men in suits maybe haven't got a clue about a lot of the things that are out there on the internet, so you can see them think YouTube? What is that? Who even goes on that? If you're a young person, and I'm counting young, anyone under 30! Who is on YouTube? Who watches YouTube content? Anyone over 30 who watches YouTube? Funnily enough, lots of people watch YouTube. I was trying to convince the men in suits who took a little bit of convincing, that (a) this was an idea we could do, and, (b), people would actually watch it. We realised that a lot of the time that people would say, "I don't think you can do this." So Sawn and I decided we needed to convince them weekend do. We put together a - we could do. We put together a pilot. We put stuff together and said, "Let's do this properly."  Let's have a go at filming some episodes." We asked our friends and family, Twitter and Facebook for their kids to send in ideas, and we asked for super hero invention ideas, and we got some amazing pictures, and we got some epic videos. I thought we were going to get videos of like a young person saying, "This is my idea, and I think you should build this, this, and this" but people dressed up. They loved it. There was such news council tax. We got these amazing videos of young people coming up with incredible ideas, and really getting into it. We thought, this might work. And a friend of ours, Lucy, sent in an invention idea, and, as soon as we saw it, we were, "This would be a fun one." Because I knew that we were filming this pilot, and we would have to go back to the men who kept saying no and show them this is an example of our project. Lucy's invention idea was a custard-firing super hero suit. I just felt that was ridiculous enough that even if they said no, I would be highly entertained as watching these serious men in suits watch that video. So Sawn and I set about - he's based in Cornwall, I'm based in Sheffield. I went to Cornwall for a weekend. We took Lucy's invention idea and we made it. We filmed the whole process, got very stressed. Things went wrong. We filmed it all, and we edited it together, and we took it to show these potential funders. And, I mean, the entertainment content of that alone. Custard girl, I don't know if anyone has seen it, beautifully fetching. She's kind of like a blue and yellow? Blue and yellow Lycra. Yes, it was a beautiful moment. Just seeing people's faces is like, "What is this?" I had a wonderful moment where a guy just sat there and went, "I still don't get it." I was, "Fine, it's not for you." I said go it away, show it to your kids and grandchildren." Our content, I like to think it's vaguely entertaining, but there is an audience in mind. And is to, a few days later, I got an email saying, "Yeah, my grandkids loved it," and that was our first victory. We got a little bit of money to start doing this. For the past 18 months, Sawn and I every single months have been setting a different invention challenge for children all over the world, predominantly in the UK, and they've been sending in their amazing and incredible invention ideas as pictures or as videos. So, one of the things that - we done a few projects. The flaming piano, I've got a gif of later is what put the project on the map. We had a loft very well established YouTubers see it go and, "Flaming piano, yes, that's pretty cool." This was another invention idea that was, so this video has had over a million views on YouTube and Facebook. It was picked up Car Throttle. Let's just say the comments on that were interesting. The idea was to liven up boring car journeys. One of the hardest things for Sawn and I is to work out the challenges. We've done stuff from crazy musical instruments, to getting across water, and this was about pleasing up long car journeys. I think so often as adults, we look at things far too sensibly. A prime example of this is that we did a challenge which was going to be crazy boat. How to get across water. The first iteration of that we tested with a few young people was boats. The inventions we got back weren't as exciting. They weren't as engaged. A young girl said to me why do I have to design a boat? I was, like, a challenge, and the aim is to get across water. "But if I was getting across water, I wouldn't design a boat, I would invent a catapult". I thought I would much rather build a catapult. We changed the challenge to be to get from one side of the river from another. We had back packs, one girl wanted to turn the lake into jelly. We made floating shoes, and a big inflatable ridiculous suit. And so sometimes R sometimes as adults, we constrain ourselves around the question. Connor's invention idea was to liven up long car journeys. And, as soon as I saw this invention idea, I could see what Connor was going for. Because, let's face it, driving can be really boring. Actually, it would be so much cooler to drive three metres in the air than it would be in a car. This is is what happened when we built Conor's invention idea.
[Video] are we nearly there yet in? We've built Connor's invention idea. Kids invent stuff! This is bursting. You burst out the top of the car. Very regal. [Music]. . 
>> My turn. >> 
So you get the idea. I think for us, one of the things that we love about YouTube is being really responsive, so we often - we've literally closed our challenge for last month about three days ago. And, within the next week, we will have built and tested that invention idea and filmed it all. And I don't know any makers out there that are little bit per exists. This is a way to - perfectionists. This is a way to solve it:  give yourself a deadline. We spend ridiculously long hours building stuff. This is another challenge. One of the challenges that went horribly wrong, because, as makers, we know that things don't work out first time. The pressure of building and bringing to life someone's invention idea is scary. Sawn and I around Christmas bought each other really ugly jackets, like really ugly. One was orange and fluffy, and the other one was, like, a silver denim jacket, and the challenge was to make them a bit more cooler, and a little bit more exciting. We were sent two invention idea. This is Ellie's idea for a Lego jacket. This is one of the simplest things we've ever made. If you want to make one, get yourself some epoxy and Lego tape. The other one was from two boys in America like an illuminated disco jacket. We had a great idea. Who here loves Peroni? We bought these amazing LEDs off them which are epic, by the way, but not designed to work on fluffy coats, so we spent five hours sewing in these LEDs and tested it, and nothing happened! In the end, we ended up getting a soldering iron and literally burning holes in the jacket. I kept wanting to bring it to events but it won't get through secures because there are wires and batteries everywhere. But, you know, it looks great on camera. You will see, would it be fair to say you - once you have a look, you will see that actually, sometimes, the things that don't work out actually can be a success. Video video are you fed up looking like everyone else? Does your jacket make you look like a boring person? Then you need the latest in crazy tech jackets. Designed by genus kid inventors. The new Illuminator and Lego jackets make sure sure you're never lost in a crowd. The jackets' integrated colour-changing LEDs ensure that everyone notices you all of the time. Bit into the collar are two powerful 60-watt speakers which turn your jacket into the ultimate wearable sound system! And if that wasn't enough, the on-board microphones allow its LED use to light up in time to music, or in time to yourself or someone else's voice!  
>> We make fools of ourselves. Ingot to the point where we just didn't care after being up for 45 hours. Video video the Lego jacket might be the jacket you need. It allows you to wear your Lego creations. If you're the sort of person who likes wearing dinosaurs, then this is definitely the jacket for you! People love playing with Lego, so why not make them love your style too by letting them cover your outfit with Lego? Great for parties, particularly if you like standing people around while other people attach things to you. Choose your crazy jacket today and never look like a boring person again. The previous advertisement features things that can't be purchased anywhere in the world. 
>> Each month, we've done very, very different challenges. Each come with their own beautiful issues and wonderful celebrations, and sometimes, I think, as adults, we look at the world in a boring way, and children look at something, and go, "Yeah, that would be so much better if ...". I tend to agree. I've never seen a bad invention idea. I've never gone into a school and not had a child draw me a drawing. Every single child in the class can draw something. For us, it's not just about often, they will say it's not the best drawing. I don't think it matters. It's about the idea. I think so often within education, it's about how neat something is, or like essentially, can you tick the box? For us, we think that it's about celebrating creativity. And, yes, for us, I think that happens at any stage. This is Xander's invention idea. Sometimes, we get a curve ball. We wanted inventions that made boring tasks more exciting. His invention idea was because he hates shopping. Anyone here hates shopping of the food variety or the clothes variety? Yes. See, this is it. So often, children see the issues within our world. One of them is shopping. So Xander came up with the idea of a robot folly. Sawn and I thought we have to build that. We have to do interesting things where we maybe don't ask for permission, so we built a robot that cooked you dinner, and we took it round Asda, and didn't ask them. We also put our flaming piano on the edge of a cliff that was owned by the National Trust and had some months that was highly protected and caused a lot of havoc, but, you know what? The FBI that rents that land from the National Trust will always remember that day! When I was talking to Jonty, I was like yes, yes, we did ask permission for this, mainly because we realised we would have do  to do a lot of work. We wanted to film in a supermarket, and we needed a few shots for that. I've realised it doesn't matter. We went through and asked permission. The staff that were working had no idea. As long as you know the manager's name, you said, "Yes, they said we could, it's usually fine." So, yes, this is:  
[Video] This is a grocery score with a once tedious endeavour. Thanks to Xander, those days are over! Kids Invent Stuff. Present be the Trolleytron 2000. What you see on your screens may appear to be a standard shopping cart but you would be gravely mistaken. The Trolleytron provides the ultimate retail experience. What makes this so special is its onboard grocery grabber. Look at it go! This can-collecting contraption automatically gathers your groceries directly from the shelves, leaving you free to do other important things - like this! Or even this! The trolleytron collects the items you require with incredible provision. Wait, there's more! This mechanised mover of melons can even pay for your groceries! Welcome to the future. Why not order your Trolleytron today so you can be as happy as these random people. That's all for now.
>> I think sometimes I've got five things I've learned from this project which I'm going to do at the end. Before we do that, we're going to watch Annabel's incredible. This I feel is a moment of genus. Annabel goes from - I know the only thing eye allowed to know about her is her name. They are very, very strict, can't know her age, or anything. Annabel came up with the idea of a sneeze-activated flame-thrower helmet. Our Super Heroes right at the beginning where we asked friends and family to send in their ideas. We decided actually that wasn't very fair. We had young people now who were sending in invention ideas every month, and we had lots of fun making Custard Girl, so we thought we would set the challenge out again. And we went mistaken. There were some beautiful ideas. As soon as we saw this, we thought, yes, yes. You know what? Some super heroes have amazing weapons, super powers, and, do you know what, if only you could sneeze fire, right? 
[Video] for really, really dangerous kids invent stuff! In a world filled with incredible heroes, not all are filled equal. With the help of a genus kid inventor, one man changes his fortunes forever. He becomes like no hero you've ever seen before.  Not all heroes fight crime or save the world. Some simply patrol their neighbourhoods looking for people in need. [Sneezes].  Achoo! But all heroes have their weaknesses! And all heroes have their battles and their team-ups. So this summer, stay tuned for Super Hero movie like no other, sneezing its way to a cinema near you. 
>> Thank you to Annabel. So, people often ask me, like how do - as an inventor, people expect you to have had that moment where you come up with something, and it's like perfect from the beginning, and it isn't. Quite often, when you're trying to solve a problem, particularly the older I've got and when I'm designing things, just gets very complicated. So, you know, you hear the stuff you were taught at school, the things you're supposed to do and not supposed to do. Sometimes, when we go back to basics, it's one of my favourite invention ideas. I saw this being drawn at a science fair. It started off simply. This is a car - you can't tell. It started off with a giraffe at the front of it. Then, the little girl drawing it found that her next to her had put a fairy, and so hers had to be pushed by a leprechaun. Suddenly, they were talking about edible roofs, edible windows, and we've got candy floss roof, and, for me, this sums up. You go where on earth do you start with that? And having seen that being drawn bit by bit, you come together. When we seek some invention ideas, they just don't stop. They don't think this is it, this looks great. They carry on, and I think we can learn so much from that because we're so often constrained by our own rules, and kids don't have that. The next thing is that things, anyone that makes things know that stuff doesn't work well. For us, something always goes wrong. It's the joy of building in a tight time frame in a tight budget. This is our underwater dolphin that didn't go underwater until we cut a hole in it and drowned it - no dolphins were harmed in this! It was way too buoyant. Something goes wrong every single build. Actually, that is something we should celebrate. If we stop when something goes wrong, we will never complete something. And when I talk to young people with making stuff, they know that. They see things go wrong, and they carry on. I think as adults, we give up a little bit too easily. I've learned more from everything that's gone horribly wrong than the things that have gone right. Just because it currently doesn't exist doesn't mean that it shouldn't. This is a jam-firing rocket. This is great to liven up any breakfast. So, yes, this fires a lot of jam! It is currently the - I would like to fire some Nutella through it. We look at things, and think, well, it was a good idea, someone else would have done it. Wrong, wrong, actually, if you've got an idea, you will do it differently. So often I see that, I started doing this, and then I found that someone else was doing something similar. So? Everyone goes at things that are a completely different way. I think so often, we think if it was a good idea, someone else would have invented it. That was something else I thought about a lot when I came up with the studies. People said, when I got my - there were people - when I got my patent through, there were people who solved this problem but didn't quite manage it. Someone who is cleverer than me or those more than me, would have invented it. There we go. Don't be put off by lack of knowledge. Sawn and I have no idea. We're not particularly talented engineers. I've not been to university. Sawn has two degrees, one is in art, and essentially, we Google a lot, we watch a lot of YouTube videos, and we make things up. I think sometimes I'm not an expert in that. How would I know? It doesn't matter. You can learn. You can have a go at things. We've never made anything, anything that was a flaming anything. Never mind a fire and water-shooting piano. We did a lot of googling, and we asked a lot of questions. In the end, it worked. I mean, it is recently safe. We did have it checked by someone who knows more than us. Actually, sometimes, just because you don't know how you're going get there doesn't mean you should not start. The hill with the endangered mask. We didn't set it on fire. Sometimes, the best - we did a gravity race challenge. When I was watching the Hacky Races earlier, I feel your pain in this was a real gravity race that we entered, and we set the invention challenge. This was Grace in the corner. She wanted to build a gravity racer shaped like a cake. A friend of ours who is an engineer said yes, why make it out of wood? Why not make it look like a cake. Why not make it out of cake! There is sometimes having conversations with people create the best ideas. This is 110kg I raced down a hill with bad brakes. Yes, there's a spectacular finish at the end of that. Sometimes, the best ideas come from those conversations and telling people about your ideas and collaborating, and we did have people eat it and they weren't ill which is always a bonus. One of the things I learned from this project which I came into it from corporate-y background, and for me, what's been exciting is about embracing my inner child and having a play. If we all do that more, the world will be a better place. Thank you. [Applause]. 
>> Does anyone have a question? The young gentleman in the front? Can you catch? 
FLOOR:  How do you send the videos in? Is there like a particular email you have to use? 
>> We have a website called kidsinventstuff.com. You can upload a picture or a video. A different challenge each month. I was looking to see. There is a new one that comes out today at six o'clock - just a little plug, you know! 
>> Another question. Anyone else? Yes. 
>> My kids absolutely love your channel and I do as well. One of the things that is the secret to the success that you have outlined loads of things in your talk but one thing you didn't mention which comes across in spades is the immense sense of fun in your presentation, and that I think is the kind of magic formula you've got that you've got the ideas for the creativity of the minds of children, you've got the engineering know-how between you. 
>> We have no know-how! 
FLOOR:  To turn that idea into something that functions, and you present it with such an immense sense of fun. All three of those things are key to making this work, and I think it works brilliantly. 
>> Thank you. Yes, I've worked on lots of projects where it hasn't been fun, and it's important to find things that are fun. For us as well, it's about challenging ourselves, so, within this project, I've done things that I never thought I would do, from cutting the roof off a car to learning how to use a chain saw. I think, actually, when we challenge ourselves, then we can have a lot of fun. Thank you. 
>> This young gentleman in the back? 
FLOOR:  My invention to make an Xbox controller, control a dirt bike. 
>> Nice, I like it! If someone says I have an invention, I'm sure people can make that happen. Anyone here of made an Xbox controller? I've seen a few around? But, yes, this is what we are trying to do. We're trying to encourage that, and, hopefully, I'm sure someone afterwards can come and find you exactly how you make that. Thank you. 
>> One last question. They are all awesome, I would love to do another half an hour of Q&A. Young lady? Talk into the cube. 
FLOOR:  How do you choose which one was the best? 
>> Oh, okay. I don't want to think of it as a competition, but funnily enough, it has become one. When we started, Sean and I were naïve because we thought we would get the invention ideas in, have a look at them, choose to build one and that would be it. It's been viewed as a competition. But we don't see it like that. We look at the invention ideas, and then we have to think there are a few things. We have a little bit of a limited budget. Can we afford to make it? Has it been made before? We will have invention ideas, and there are things that are part way towards that or people that have made that. So occasionally, we have sent emails back to kids saying this is a fab idea, have you seen this? So and so has done this. Other times is we like to childhoods invention ideas that adults would never think of. When we did the floating shoes, kind of mention it to a few adults, and they look at you like you're mental, and for us, they look - of course you want a pair of shoes on water, of course you want a jam-firing rocket. We have that inner adult in our heads going, if you are an adult, you would never build this. That's what we want to build. 
>> Are you around in the village somewhere? 
>> Yes. If you have further questions or ideas, come up to Ruth, and bother her, and, if you bring Lego, maybe she will help you turn on and use it. Please give another very warm round of applause for Ruth. Thank you very much! [Applause]. 