Animatronics and robots in the movies with Matt Denton by Matt Denton
>> I know what robots you are looking for. You're looking for animatronics and robots in the movies with Matt Denton. Please give him a very warm welcome! [Applause]. 
>> You should try standing up here. I feel like I've been at the bar all day. A bit of a lean. Control systems and techniques, and behind the screens stuff in the films. I've worked in the film and television specialising in controlled systems for animatronics for 25 years now. A bit about my background, how I got into electronics in the first place. I got after school in apprenticeship with mar Connie defence systems. That was a four-year apprenticeship where I learned basic skills. There was a lot of a practical element for it. We did software engineering. Towards the end of my apprenticeship, I could see that software engineering was much more interesting to me, so I kind of diverted slightly halfway through. I then started a degree at Portsmouth University in electronics engineering again. And rather foolishly, I was offered a place in the second year, and I said no, I'm going to do the first year with my mates - idiot - and got bored in the first year and left to join the film industry, and I'm not saying anyone do that. Finish a degree, because I never went back to finish my degree, and it's always bugged me. But, I got a job, I basically bugged some people at a television show, and said I want to work in special effects, how do I get into that? They said you've got to build stuff. What can you make? I couldn't make much at the time but I did used to make models in my spare time, I was really into Star Wars, so I scratch-built this model thing in my shed. I said I can make things like this. They said we might give you a job. They gave me a job in the summer after my first year at uni. I wasn't a very good model-maker. What else can you do? I said I do electronics. They are like, "Okay." They had loads of stuff that needed things like lights, and bells, and whistles, and actuation. I kind of ended up being their electronics boy. It suited me just fine because I was an expert in their company because they had no-one else who could do it. I was learning a lot at the time. And when I started with this kind of stuff, this was about mid-1990s, 1993, it mean 94, something like that, it was more traditional control techniques for animatronics within film and TV commercials. Animatronics is effectively a robotic puppet. It motors and actuators inside of it but it's usually electronically controlled, or hydraulically controlled, and often, there's a team of puppeteers in the background making it look alive. There's no real intelligence in it other than the people controlling it. To define a robot is not a robot, it's a creative piece of robotic art. Your washing machine is probably more of a robot than what I do. We got into this animatronic control systems, and I started by taking traditional methods like the controls you see on the screen, these were great controllers, people might remember them. I used to hot-rod these so little LCD screen in the top-left corner was my only modification to expand its functionality. Soon after that, getting into stuff which needed maybe 14 or 15 channels control which was unheard of in radio control these days. You know, stuck at about eight channels. There were all servo-based controls. Most animatronic heads use them today. There was motion control. I took an existing motion control platform, a well-known one at the time and adapted it for animatronics. Then we could do on this particular advert, this is a Lloyds Bank advert from the 1990s, the R giant that roller skates down a hill, and his head about 14 servos and actuators in it which at the time blew me away. I was like how are we going to do this? You can tell that, as you will see the slides progress, you can tell the age of the photo by the size of my monitor. And the size of the computer system and the monitor sat on. So that was a 386 DX33, blisteringly fast with four megabytes of ram, and 140MB hard drive. I thought I had won the lottery! So, yes, the systems were big, chunky. It is more or less signal conditioning, input to output. And scaling. A tiny bit of mixing in there. You could record and play back and basic editing features. And then, basically, I'm doing this some skipping through in chunks as I usually do this talk in 45 minutes to an hour. Coming out of working for this company, the dream at the time is to work for Jim Henson Creature Shop the crème de la crème of all animatronics. I got there at about 1996, and I worked on a film called Buddy, to spend a few weeks on Buddy. I really enjoyed it. I walked in there thinking I knew everything. After three weeks, I knew I knew nothing, because their level, their game was up here somewhere. But by that point, I had developed my own control system, so because the motion-control system we were using, the camera one was fine but it wasn't dedicated to animatronics and there was lots it could do we didn't need and a lot it didn't do that we did need. I got into Hensons and was young and brash. I was like is that correct you want to use my system, not yours." They developed theirs for years. For some reason, I thought mine was better. Amazingly, they did use it. We were doing a film called Lost in Space, and we built these two hydraulic massive robots for the 1997 film, and, at the time, their control system wasn't really geared for this kind of stuff. It was for small animatronic heads, and they were actually going to use the camera system that I had based mine on, and I said I've got a system that's dedicated for robotics, and it's based on the camera system you're going to get. Use mine, and I convinced them to, and they did. That was the start of my control systems career. These robots were really another step up. I had never done hydraulics, this level of control. That's me with a pony-tail. I go through various phase of hair in this talk. Didn't have much time to build them. The control system, as you can see, the bottom right there, it is a massive desk of computers and racks, and the monitor is still about the same size. There's a puppet ear in front bit, puppeteer who is in front of a control rig. The robot would copy whatever he does. He would have a save input device what he was wearing. Whatever move he makes, the robot would make. This taught us a lot about safety as well, because we had a very near miss on this job. We built two of these machines, and they were hydraulic powered. We had a guy outside of the stage on a hydraulic pump starting and stopping the pump for us, and he had a set of comms on so we could talk to him. They keep the pump outside the stage because of the noise it makes. Long cables in the stage, the robot on stage. The robot is on a platform there, and the cables dropping down through the platform and I'm underneath. That was my control station. One day, I hear this second unit were running. It wasn't my machine. It's horror story of the robot going out of control and flailing its arms around, and stuntmen screaming and running. Horrible. It turns out that someone had walked along a wall where we plugged our computers in, and I need to charge my drill up, pulled our plug out, and plugged his drill in, and then he hears the screaming, and what had happened is there was a computer shutdown, but they weren't interlocked to the pump, and the pump still running, so four hydraulic power but no control. Which is terrifying. And our comms were also on the same main system so shouting at the guy on the comms to kill the pump. He didn't realise the comms had gone quiet. Someone comes running out and hits the pump stop button. We learned to put in interlocks after that point. Deep learning curve. Control systems evolved, and, when I was at hen sons, they were - Hensons, they were doing expression-based control. That's where my systems evolved rapidly after being there a while. It really started who when I was on Harry Potter. This is now about 2003. The pony-tail still exists, but I've got a flat-screen monitor, uh! Check that out. That cost me £800 at the time. It was 800 by 600 resolution! Yes. And the PC is sat underneath of it. Look how small. It is incredible! That is Buckbeak the Hippgryff from Harry Potter. At this point, I'm into expression control, so rather than controlling a single motor with a single input drive, expressive control basically is like if I want to make the animatronic face look happy, that uses usually about 12 of the motors in the face, if it is a good face. A mouth corner, bottom eyelids, eyebrows have to move together. Rather than trying to puppeteer that, the expressive-based control, you create morph targets, and you morph into a shape and everything in between. With this system, I then had 32 out put channels, 32 expressions, but all of those expression s control all of those motors, and they all have multiple morph targets. You could go from an expression to happy to sad, to something else, all on one joystick. But add on top of that everything else you want to do, so, on a normal character, we would have like a jaw movement, and the reason I'm doing this is because you will see in a minute, we use devices called Waldoes which will track your hand. We would have a jaw movement and an "oo" and an "ee" shape on the thumb, and, if you can do those two, you can get away with most dialogue. A bit of jaw, and then some other twists up here, you could do stuff with the face, another joystick which would do the eye control, and the brows, and everything else, and then the computer would tie these expressions together, and summon them all together in a big mixer, squirt them out to the head. Suddenly, you get this life-like animation out of it, because you've not got one person doing the eyes up and down, or one joystick with the ice up and down. There were other - eyes up and down. There were mechanical techniques, complex mechanical techniques. It also took a lot of the previous models we worked on would take teams of puppeteers to work together. And this would bring it all down to pun puppeteer. He could drive an entire animatronic face on his own rather than three people trying to co-ordinate together. So, we used lots of in put devices to help us with this. One of them is called the Waldo, comes from a short sci-fi story from 1942. I think it's Robert A H. Yndlan. If you're looking at that picture, some of my colleagues here, this is on Harry Potter again. We were filming Buckbeak at this point. He's holding on to one of the joy sticks in his left hand. His right hand, you can't see it, but he's got a Waldo on, that device, which puts his hand into an electronic glove and it can track his finger and palm movements. That came about because Jim Henson wanted a way from going to a sock puppet to an animatronic. He said I can do this, you figure out how to get this on to the animatronic. That's where it came from. The reason it's called a Waldo is because of the sci-fi book, and the character is called Waldo because he creates devices to make his body stronger. This is input devices. We make specific ones. There's a twice in the background there which are the legs of the Hippogryff. We do customs and control as needed. One of the things about control systems and computers is that quite often they're in hideous locations. There's Buckbeak under its cover. We turn up in Scotland in their summertime and it rained for six weeks. Then, when it didn't rain, the sun came out, and the midges came out and bit you to death. It was pretty grim. That is actually the guy holding the umbrella is my boss at the time. That entire coat was hand cut feathers, hand dyed them, stitched them into a suit, and it's raining on it. Every time it rained, someone had to run in with an umbrella to replace the suit. Then most of it got replaced by CEG. I've got a video here. Day 1. This is my little shanty town, so I had to build my computer underneath the tarpaulin hidden over the back of the set. Me and my mate spent about six weeks under this tarpaulin because we weren't very prepared for rain. It was supposed to be summertime! So, yes, it is not always everything thinks of films as glamorous. It is not that glamorous most of the time. And then a lot of what we are trying to achieve is actually we build robotic structures but we don't want them to look robotic half the time because we are making creatures, or robots, or or droids. So a lot of the processes I've spent in control systems is trying to hide the fact that it's a robot and it doesn't move robotically. This is the werewolf from Harry Potter with my good colleague building the mechanism there. This was a beautiful mechanism again. A guy on stilts, and really a beautiful, beautiful thing to watch, in performance, and one of the best animatronic wolf-type faces I've ever seen. I spent a lot of time on it. I use a lot of mathematical filters in my control systems. You can turn on a first-order filter. It might mean something to a lot of people it makes things very kind of organic in their movement, it dampens things down, because you don't want things too juddery and stuff. I filter stuff a lot, and we use acceleration and deceleration curves to make things more natural. We did this a lot on the werewolf. There's the guy practising on his stilts. And he hasn't got the full costume on there. He's got a cable@en. So the - tether. The Hippogryff was nicknamed the "heap of grief" but the werewolf was the "why wolf" because we should never have built it. We got him on set. It worked well. We had two guys in this, this guy was a six foot eight ballerina, and the other FBI who played it was a kick-boxer. Get him on set. And put the face on. If you shut your eyes and try to balance, it is hard with your eyes shut. Try to balance on stilts on rough terrain with a werewolf head on, it ain't going to happen. For animatronics jobs that go wrong, we call them "animatrocities". By this time, I've got a laptop! Yay. It is a pan sonic tough book. These things were like £4,000. These were secondhand on eBay for 300. I'm always down the line in technology. It was a beautiful thing. I've got a quick video clip of it here. This is stop-frame animation because it is a time lapse but it does go into full animation at the end. Bear in mind, this is 2003 - 2004, sorry. We're quite a way back here. At this point, this is the most complex thing we've done to date. [Video]. Again, a lovely suit but barely used in the film. So, I will move on a bit faster. I've been given my ten-minute warning. This is a hexapods. You might have seen the Mantis today. Hopefully  the last ... . Hey, I'm back. Do I get that minute back? All right! Thank you. So the hexapod, yes, basically, I built dozens of these things. This is - this was the most complex before the mantis. It got me the job on Harry Potter, and we did dress this one up to look like a creature, in the back of Hagrid's hut in the back of Mad Eye Moody's Classroom with a skin on, not looking like that. I think looking a bit like that in one of them. That's a much more complex control system. We had never done anything that actually walked. Most of our stuff is fake, smoke and mirrors because we can use film's and trickery. It was interesting doing a walking animatronic and fully self-contained. Sometimes, less is more. A film we worked on called the World's End, this was a ahead that we did that was a copy of Greg Towley who is a stunt guy. There's a scene in a bathroom. He's basically a robot. He gets his head knocked off, and ends up with a head on the floor. They needed it to look alive, and so I was in charge of this particular project, and I said it's just 12 servos: the eyes, the brows, the blinks, and the mouth. The guy who built it wanted to put more in. This video went viral. Lots of people nicked it and posted it up. I will show you what you can do with a minimum amount and a very good skin-painting job president. The artist who painted the silicone skin was stunning. I can tell that's fake. The number-one YouTube programme, saying it is fake, a guy on his side with a white T-shirt on because nobody wants to believe that we actually built it. So, yes, that's kind of, that's a really lovely thing you can do, and it's using the bare minimum. You don't have to make it massively complicated. But there was a very skilled team on the art finish on that one. So moving to Star Wars. When I joined Star Wars, my first job was to create a simulation of a version of BB8, this was a version which used stabiliser wheels. We left the wheels on so we could show the director what he's going to get and how he can shoot it. You can shoot is clean from this angle. We drove it up a ramp which was going to be the millennial falcon lamp to make sure that the motors would work, and he's going to handle it. And then, this video should move on a bit, and you will see, there we go, off the top, and there's the final product, once we built it. We imported some of the finest sand from Jewsons and stuck it in a container and drove it around the sand because it would go to Abu Dhabi. This is us trying it in the back at Pinewood to the set in the background there for episode seven. So it was really nice. The first time I had simulated something before we built it. This was a game-changer for us. It saved us a huge amount of time. And, obviously, it helped because it was robotic rather than creature-line. It is hard to simulate creature texture when it is a robot or a droid, should I say. This was our first day on set, getting ready for the very first shot of episode. We were the first shot - terrifying. We combined technologies a lot as well. That was the trike, our radio controlled ones, we had lightweight ones that people could carry. I've got a quick shot of the film here because there are three in succession. They're all different technologies. We've got puppet, and coming up, transcribing, and now with Carrie. Three different technologies, go that keeps people guessing because they're not sure what they're looking at. If you switch the technology, even with CG, it is a way of fooling the eye. And just incidentally, that was the very last shot we filmed with BB8 was John at the bottom of the pit there, and we got wrapped like an actor which has never happened to me in my career. BB8 was such a big deal to the crew at that point, when they wrap an actor, they go well done, you got paid loads, bye. We got wrapped the same way. I picked up BB8 aloft my head, and they started singing the Lion King. It was kind of fun. [Laughter]. Then of course we went on to build this guy. This came after the film, and this is probably my most technical achievement with my colleagues I built it with, who was Josh Lee, who did the mechanics. This was the real BB8. We rolled him out on stage at Star Wars celebration. The crowd went wild because they thought it was CG, couldn't be done. I've got James Bruton who was starting his own version of a real BB8 at the time and we didn't know we lived in the same town. Some guy said he's building it. There is a guy here building one. I said it's not me because I've not said anything because I'm signed by an NDA. There's James. Still dragging him around with me! He's holding me back, I tell ya! That particular droid took me on a great adventure. Me and my colleague Josh who built it with me joked that we built it so we could go to a premiere. It is not a joke! People behind the camera never get to go to premieres, of course they wanted BB8 there, so they invited us. We are the only people who can operate it. More advanced techniques, procedural, software-based, you a I don't blink and breathe cycles. Kin net critic animation is another one we're playing with, motion capture. I will show you another one. This is a K2SO test head. We never used it because it was C about it. All the animation on the head is based on the movement of my hand, so, if someone is wearing this head, imagine it's a creature and they're wearing it, if they look down, the eyes look down. If they change - whenever you move the ice, you blink, blink, blink as you move, and this does it automatically for you. So you can augment this with live puppeteering as well. So the process in the head does all the auto, but it feeds in a mix from the puppeteer so he can take control at any time. It worked really nice. This was just a test. You can squint the eye if you lean over and stuff. There was a character in Solo. As soon as I saw the concept art, we've got to use the system on this character. It was possibly the, made for it, basically. This is a short clip. It's the one I have. But - blink and you will miss it. This is not puppeteered. Ready? There. That's based on the actor's motion of his face. All those eyes. It was beautiful. We had people coming up to us whilst on set filming that character, and people were behind the camera watching a monitor saying how are they doing that live CG on set? And they were like "Ha! Gotcha, CG guys!" Walk on set, and you can touch it. We got into face-tracking, I want to move on a bit faster now. This was working lovely as well. This company called Faceshift and I adapted it to plug into my animatronics system. You can't really see it there, but the eyes on the mic were some of the best eye movement we had ever seen, because your eyes jitter all the time, and I have filters to do this, but you can't beat a live capture, and the blinks were beautiful, and we took this a lot further. Then the company that make the software got bought by Apple, and now those Apple phones with those character things that track your face, I can't use that any more, because Apple bought it. So that was the end if that. It was the best software on the market. There was nothing else that could compete with it. That's a bit of a shame. More recently, we're into motion-tracking. This is another test for a character we were working on. We try, I basically try and adopt any new technology into the control systems we use to get the best performance out of everything. It is not always the right technology. If you can do it with rods or just someone holding something, and a stick, or whatever, it is fine. Certain things that work really well. And there are certain characters that you have to use this technology on. It just helps. We never try to push things to make things complicated. If anything, I'm always trying to dumb things down. So, yeah, it's been a great journey for me so far in my career. I couldn't ever have imagined working on a character that ends on Time magazine, and nonetheless we got a visual effects award from the VES Society, and as an engineer, you never expect to get an award in film industry because it goes to the people who sit in front of the camera mostly. So I've been very lucky. Another high point of my career was getting to work on Jurassic World last year. This was another big hydraulic rig. Nice doing it since it mean 97, other man the mantis. I'm lucky to do what I do. I've got someone staring at me already. [Cheering]. Thank you very much. I don't think there's time for a Q&A? I don't know. He's get the mike out. There is time. Okay. Cool. There we go. If you have any questions, let me just start now and say I can't answer anything about Episode 9. 
>> Sorry. Two quick questions and quick answers, please. 
FLOOR:  Who do you want to work for next? 
>> I would quite like to go in work in the States for a bit. I worked there a bit through travelling, and there's some really work going on out there with companies like Spectral Motion and Stan Winston's company which became Legacy Effects. Anything, really. I'm almost considering moving completely away from film. I've done 25 years of it. I loved it, but I quite like pure robotics. I'm not clever enough but I think I've got something I could add possibly. I don't know. Thank you. 
FLOOR:  Hello. How do you avoid the sound of the servos moving in things? Have you got a quiet actuator? 
>> We don't. Sound guys hate us! I mean, literally hate us. We have this constantly, start doing a take, and six eyes, the thing with six eyes has 62 servos in it. The system I have now will do 500 servos, so I said that's progressed through the years. They hate it, and we will do a shot and come over within the second take and go, "Um, can you turn it off?" "If you don't want to see it move ...". then it is back and forth between the director and the sound guy. What they do at the end of the day, they do ADR dialogue, so everyone's on set, and they will do all the dialogue again whilst everyone is being quiet and overdub it if it is being bad. It is a problem. 
>> That's all we have time for. 
>> If anyone has any questions, I can hang out a bit here.  I was asked to bring giant logo with me, and I've got some here. But we could hang out. Either whatever, thank you very much. [Applause]. 