Banned from encrypting by Mustafa Al-Bassam and Jake Davis. 
>> Hello, everyone. Welcome, our talk is about to start. As everyone gets settled, there is the robot contest out tonight in the bar. Sign up at the info tents. EMF is run entirely by volunteers. You can be part of the making the magic happen. If you do it for three hours, you get a meal. Less than three hours, you get our love, gratitude, and affection, and the satisfaction that you know you've made the awesome be even more awesome! On that note welcome to Banned from Encryption with Mustafa Al-Bassam, and Jake Davis. [Applause]. 
>> I'm Mustafa. This is Jake. We were banned from encrypting stuff for five years. This was a Serious Crime Prevention Order we were bound to for five years from 2013 to 2018 which expired a few months ago. The reason why we were bound to this sear, this sear sear is we had a hack ing group that bunched into a whole load of stuff, the US Senate, too long to list to mention. So, for example, one of the, we did is we put up a fake news article on the PBS website. 
>> A lot of people believe this is true. [Laughter].  
>> This is on the back of the News of the World hacking scandal. We hacked into The Sun newspaper to put up a fake news article that republic Earth Murdoch ingested a large quantity of palladium before passing out early in the hours of the morning. For some reason, a lot of people found this funny. Like, people found watching  ... as a result of all of this, we were arrested in the summer of 2011. And as a condition of our bail, we were banned from using the internet. And, we were on bail for about two years, and Jake additionally was also on electronic tag because he had to report to a police station. 
>> Yes, I had on top of an internet ban, an electronic ban from - and then - every single day I had to report, otherwise, it would start beeping, and people would come round in a van. It worked with a tag and a box. If the tag was not near the box, it went off. Allegedly a lot of shenanigans could occur between the tag and the box. That might be on the talk.
>> The exact thing it said on my bail conditions was that I was not allowed to use any device had the capacity of connecting to the internet. This is when I was starting my A-levels when I was 16. It was difficult to do my A-levels without assessing the internet. For example, all of my homework was sent over email, so I got a lot of detentions because I didn't do my homework because I couldn't access it. A lot of these A-Level courses have, for example, biology coursework, you get more points for using internet references. I was actually missing out on points in my grade because I couldn't use the internet. During the time when we were banned from the internet, I think it was the European courts of human rights, or something, that released a piece saying it's actually against your human rights, against someone's human rights to ban them from assessing the internet. Since that, they stopped putting these kinds of bail conditions on people. Yes, we were sentenced in 2013, so, about two years after we were arrested. That was in Southwark Crown Court. We were also given a serious crime prevention order that lasted until 2018. Because I was under 18 when I was arrested, I had 230 hours of community service in a charity shop. I think you had two-year sentence but own spent a month of that. 
>> A two-year sentence and that magic electronic tag knocked off most of that. You had charity shop work where you sold ice cream.
>> I got free ice cream from the people working there, but it was a charity shop that sold clothes for Deaf Blind people, which is nice thing to do, I guess. So, this was first - of my serious crime prevention order. It may I ... or physical devices capable of assessing the internet, provided that, for each such item, where an item has the capacity to retain or display the history of internet use, such capacity is and remains enabled. I can't delete my browsing history or use private browsing, either. The second one is such item does not run software which is designed to prevent data from being retrieved from unallocated space on the storage drive. That means every time I delete a file, usually, when you delete a file, it doesn't delete the contents of that file, it deletes like an index.dat file. This is preventing me from deleting the file properly by overwriting them with zeroes. The third one it is not encrypted other than the factory-installed installed encryption and any encryption must be provided to the Metropolitan Police offenders' management unit on request. I can't use hidden volumes, either. Now, it's quite a vague what this means. What does it mean for a device to be encrypted? Does that mean that the communications can't be encrypted or does that mean the storage in the device can't be encrypted? Personally, I interpreted that as the storage itself can't be encrypted but I did it anyway because of the exception for employment or educational purposes. So, you have to keep in mind that, originally, when they tried to draft this Serious Crime Prevention Order, the lawyers tried to put in a clause in the order saying every time we used the cloud, we had to email them. I'm like, what is the cloud? Do you even know what that means? They removed it when we challenged them on it. 
>> We wouldn't be able to email them without that same cloud, bearing in mind there were different clouds.
>> It would be a recursive loop using the cloud, I would email them again. 
>> They didn't appreciate that when we explained that to them. They didn't like that [Laughter]. We will get on to more of those a bit. Five long years ago.
>> Why, yes, those - and no computers are ... save for the purposes of employment or education. When they arrested Jake, they found 15 virtual computers on his device, and the judge found that a bit scary. 
>> The judge thought that 16 computers in one computer, this is not right! We need to stop! Confiscate this! 
>> I guess the idea of this one was to prevent us from trying to hide our crimes, or whatever. This is quite annoying, because it means I can't buy a virtual private server to host a website, or to host a server on. I had to buy dedicated servers instead. It defeats the purpose of the order. But, anyway ... . I bought dedicated servers in France and notified that it was in France. They didn't seem to mind. Also said that every time I come to only or possess any additional laptop, personal computer, or internet-capable physical device I must notify them within seven days, and to give them the name and serial number of each laptop and location it's usually kept. I don't know know if you know what they mean by the name of the laptop? I don't know if - I don't give my computers name? Maybe they mean the network name? It also says that nothing in this order is supposed to prevent my lawful every day use, like train, aircraft cinema ticket - supermarket automated machines, bank machines, point-of-sale credit card payment facilities. This proves a point, that when you're putting these conditions on someone, you have to realise that we live in a society now where everything we do it's internet-connected or internet-enabled or computer enabled. So I had to send them this email every time I buy a new computer, or destroy a computer or get rid of it. I had to put a read recent on them. Every time I opened it, I would get a read receipt. I would get read receipts from every time I opened my emails. Two years later, turns out they checked their records and they had nothing of anything I sent. They didn't seem very competent to me. Every year, like, they have the person in charge of our case, a new person is assigned. I don't think this is the kind of job that any police officer wants. This is kind of like the job that they get to be punished or something, to deal with these orders. 
>> Deal with the emails from the trolls. So there were various discrepancies in the arbitrary banning over a five-year period. I had to ask about these individually. Windows 10 is allowed despite having in-built shredding functions, Mac, you just type shred. Qubes was the thing they banned the most. They used capital letters, no, for Qubes. Cali definitely banned, they saw the dragon! [Laughter]. Amazon CE2s, I don't think they understood the description of those and saw the word "cloud", "server". VPNs are fine if I tell them which one. Hence, your dedicated server in France.
>> Yes, I used a dedicated server in France. 
>> Tor definitely banned. Chrome Incognito. It said I had to delete internet history but it didn't say I had to generate internet history. [Applause]. I think they appreciated that one, actually. Two years ago, what is encryption, because HTTPS, et cetera, when we withdraw from a bank now, sometimes, it is encrypted, and this is exactly what they said. They said BlackBerry with PGP. I said, well, fine! [Laughter]. 
>> People have no background. They're just staying what they think. So, like, I think, they're - I actually think they're wrong about most of these if you look at the legal document. In theory, Tor should be allowed. If I'm using Tor, I'm not encrypting my laptop but my communications. Can the advice has an ability to generate history, it has to be enabled. I don't think the people knew what they were talking about. 
>> Because it was a five-year period, they had various iterations of the team. The new people who came in had to deal with the scraps left bit others. By the end of the five years, people didn't know an SCPO existed. There aren't many of these around. I think they tried to find the most severe restriction they could and threw this at us.
>> Most are for people not made for, like, computer hackers, made for people who commit large-scale fraud, it's like, and then they put conditions in there, you have to tell us about your bank accounts, or, for example, people accused of sexual crimes, so they have to report this, or whatever. 
>> The more human stories from the people behind the acronym, SCPO LOMU, I had several device disclosures in five years. Every time I bought a new phone, we sent the IMEI, and the SIM, et cetera, except my tactic was to send way too much information, so I would send the colour of the phone, where I bought it from, like, if I liked it. I liked the glass! [Laughter]. Because there were seven new device disclosures, that wasn't just me buying seven new phones, mostly because I smashed some of them, and I would then send them pictures of the smashed phone. I say I can't believe it happened again! It fell out of a locker. Hit the floor. These Samsung screens not very good. They started responding with a few jokes.
>> I had the Samsung phone that could blow up. I said I bought a new Samsung phone. I said don't worry, this is the one that does not blow up. 13 international travel disclosures. As you can imagine, airports are very amusing. When we were arrested and years later tried to get our passports back, they claimed they lost them. This is the case with us and many others. Ours didn't work at the e-passport. We got the manual check and they got nine boxes up on their screen, and their face just dropped. I don't know what they had to deal with, but it depends on the seniority of the customs summer.
>> Usually, they write something down on a piece of paper. Every time our - our e-passport chips were disabled in the UK - we could use them everywhere else except the UK. When you go through UK, we always had to go to the manual border control. There is usually a queue specifically for the people whose e-passport gates doesn't work, and you can see it's full of criminals there! So every time we go through, they have to write something down on a piece of paper. When we go through, they usually close their specific booths for five minutes because they have to email the Metropolitan Police every time we enter the UK. 
>> My favourite -- well, I enjoyed going through in the end because I knew what they would see, and knew if they were inexperienced customs officer, they would panic and buy time and ask me questions. I went through once, and this guy had seen it all, he went, "Very impressive.!" [Laughter].  "Never seen this many restrictions before." Very good. "Very nice." Handed me my passport back. There's some sense of humour with it. Within the five-year period, we had ten different police contacts, all of whom either moved to the department, moved from another, senior, or junior moving up, and they don't think they knew each other. It was a strange autonomy. We got a different answer if we emailed Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, et cetera. I can tell you a few things I gleaned from them. The boss, Dave, likes Guinness - I changed their names. When I did a trip to Ireland. I disclosed too much information. I was going on a camping trip and I drew a physical map of all the campsites and I faxed that through. [Laughter]. I said to the guys there. To be fair to him, he said, "I hope you have a nice pint of Guinness". That was nice, on the other hand, the time I went to Italy, the officer does not like Italy. I was going to Venice. It is beautiful. He wanted my phone number again. I said it is on my records. I said I need it again, which presumably means they lost mine too. They don't care for the anecdotes, the pictures I send them of the beach ... [Laughter]. Or like the hotel room. I send them so many hotel rooms. "This one is for talks and such" this doesn't have a safe. Do you use this one? [Laughter]. And so, I started to see this trend, because, it was like sort of a self-defence mechanism. If we broke this order, we were going to prison for five years, so we didn't want to let them have this over us completely. It became a psychological warfare. 
>> Your strategy was to jack around with them, give them as much information as possible. Mine was the complete opposite. Mine was to make their job as hard as possible. When they sent me that email saying we have nothing on record, please send us everything again, I told them, that's not my problem, that is your problem. The thing is, like, the guy got a bit scared because he had nothing to show to his boss that, for any records that he has for me, even though I've sent them. I think, in some way, they were more scared of me than I was scared of them. I didn't want to give them extra information because I didn't think that would be right for them, right to do that.
>> We've got a few minutes left. We can talk more about this is what I - compliance through rambling in a psychological warfare and hadn't trolling. They - hypothetical trolling. They started to less information. They left us alone. For example, because we had to disclose every new phone that we bought in vast detail, it was a quick process for us, but for them, they had to sit and type it in various columns. Hypothetically, we could run a script to scrape eBay and disclose to them the IMEIs, hundreds of them, and they would have to sit there for weeks inputting them over and over again. They knew that they were the type of people that would do that if, for example, they decided to come in like arbitrarily check our computers. We didn't have any computer checks for five years even though they did have the power to do it. 
>> I did have one. When I told them I'm not going to tell you any - send you my emails again, they made me bring my devices to the police station. Then they made me bring the devices to the police station so they could see and check them, and then the guys asked me to open my laptop. I said, okay. I said what next? He didn't know what to say what next. He didn't know what to check.
>> One of the, one of the very quick examples, this is one of the emails I sent them. I disclosed the reply. Never mind. It's about my Samsung phone. "You won't believe it, the phone in my last email also smashed. This time, it fell over a locker when grabbing my coat. One small crack is enough to obliterate it. I got another Samsung. The one that overheats and sets itself on fire randomly. I hope that doesn't happen otherwise I would have to disclose another one. I also got a pair of goggles with the phone which are designed to enter virtual reality, not create virtual computer." Three days went by, and they responded, no hello, regards, just, "Thanks Jake". Five years of these shenanigans, and they were delighted to get rid of us, actually. I think we can conclude that the orders make no sense. That's the conclusion. 
>> At least for computer hackers at least.
>> It doesn't seem that it is the fault potentially of the team behind it. I don't think they liked having to enforce these orders, either. The orders were made through a strange combination of the Crown Prosecution Service, the judge, the police, all coming together to try and define this - in the same way we were banned from the internet, and that doesn't really happen any more, they were test be these things on us, because our case at the time was one of the first of that nature in terms of the public domain. All of these things were thrown as a test and they realise they don't work and they don't realise them again. They are realising, over the five-year period, the state of encryption has changed so much, so, year on year, weeks went by, and months. It was very evident that they can't just say no HTTPS, yes be you can windows 10, and no Ubuntu, but you can use a VPN in the UK, but use a dedicated server in France with a non-UK VPN server inside it, et cetera. They think SCPOs make no sense? 
>> I don't think they were designed with computer hackers in mind. As I said, they were designed for financial criminals, and you have to declare your bank accounts, and sufficient like that. The idea isn't necessarily, it is to frustrate crime, like, on the subconscious level, like, you're thinking, if you are a sear  -- an order, you will think twice about committing crimes because you know the police can ask you at any second to let them examine your laptop, if they had any evidence to create nor crimes. They don't have to get a warrant, they can examine your laptop whenever they wanted.
>> So I guess we could impart the advice don't get an Serious Crime Prevention Order. Thank you very much. That's the SCPO! [Applause].