Burnout and Your Meat Computer by Jessica Rose.
>> Hello, everyone! Welcome to the 1213 talk on stage A on turn-out and your meat computer. It's about to be given by Jessica Rose, technical manager of Future Learn, host of Pursuit podcast and running karaoke here at camp. Before we dive into the talk, a brief reminder that we could use more volunteers. You could be the awesome person up here having technical difficulties! Or doing something else and having tons and tons of fun. Please go to the website and sign up and volunteer and help make EMF an absolutely incredible experience. 
>> Thank you so much. [Applause]. Hello, it's not remotely morning. Good afternoon, everyone. I'm so excited to be here with you today, and I'm going to be talking to you about burnout. I'm going to be talking about burnout while extremely burned out, so this will feel like bad performance art! This is going to feel a little bit like performance art. Just to get things started, I will introduce myself, even though I've got a fantastic intro from our MC. I do get to manage fantastic engineers at Future Learn but I also travel, give talks, and I do this podcast, and other stuff. I do too much all the time, and everything is just fine! But some of you, especially who came to this for the hands-on great stuff, Jeff, we're on a first-name basis, great, you're going to talk about burn-out. I've opted into this talk but why bringing a talk about burning out at EMF. Why should I care about my brain? I hope you care about your brain, because it is part of you. Your brain is absolutely magical, and your brain is going to keep you from making cool stuff, or breaking cool stuff. Your brain is this - it is so small. It's a tiny wet bag of meat soaked in chemicals, and you keep it trapped in a bone prison. Your brain gives you everything you've ever loved, feared, that weird thing that happened in middle school that wakes you up at three in the morning. That is your brain! Your brain is fantastic. Your brain is mundane, your brain is beautiful, and your brain is so, so fragile and easy to break. I'm going to be talking to you about occupational burn-out, a way to break your brain, and hopefully some ways not to break your brain. So I'm in technology but I'm obsessed with cognitive psychology. Cognitive psychology sort of became a thing in the 1960s when people started studying the brain, and studying the brain's processes as though they were computers. I said wow.  We've got these computers. They're so modern, they fill a room, they're the future. Let's look at our brain as though there are these computers. And there are two big concepts I want to talk to you about today. The first one should feel familiar to most of us. Working memory is the cognitive psychology concept of sort of how much working memory we have. It's how big a hard drive you've got, but what bag of meat terms. It is the space you've got to work with right now. Where as cognitive load is how much of that working memory you've got taken up right now. And you might think, "Well, I'm not thinking about that much, I'm not doing that much now, I'm just watching a talk." The cool thing about cognitive load is that it's not just the very conscious thoughts on your mind right now, it is that email in your inbox you've been ignoring, it's that brown letter from HMRC, it's that, "Oh, my God, did I lock the door?" Every process running in the background fills up part of your cognitive load. To make this more challenging, the amount of working memory you have changes all the time. If you're a bright, happy, young 20-something, and you didn't drink last night, and you got a great night's sleep, you might have this giant beaker of capacity. You might be ready to go. You say wow.  I have all of this glorious working memory to fill with processes. If you're my age, and you were out drinking last night, maybe you were at the karaoke tent, ... maybe we're still that little guy around noon today. But it's not just about how you feel right now. Age, impairment, injury, burnout can all change the amount of energy you have. As this is an all-ages show, I got to take out the swearing in this talk so I thought I would swap by drinking on stage instead. We are okay with the idea that this is sort of like the conceptual amount of that tiny beaker, right? We are a long way from home most of us, right? Okay. I've got to get back. Eventually, I have to get back. Sunday, Monday, I'm going to take a train back, and, oh, my God, I have to go to work. Is that meeting still on.  It goes and goes. You get every single thing you're concerned about until you hit the top, the really, really crappy thing about [inaudible] emptying your working memory is you don't get just to drink bubbles on stage. You need to clear these things. You need to get rid of stuff that you're thinking about. I want everyone here not to think about axolotls. Don't think about salamanders at all. You conscious ly willed yourself to clear that from your plate? Perfect. So we've talked about these two big cognitive psychology ideas. We've got working memory and cognitive process. What's burnout? Occupational burnout has been a concept since the 1970s. Occupational burnout is just exhaustion. It is both physical and mental exhaustion, and it's caution that you get - ta-da - from doing too much. People find themselves burned out when they find themselves facing protracted ongoing stress that they feel is inescapable, so it might not be that you're working very, very hard. I imagine all of you today are working very hard, yes? I mean, this is being live streamed, you all fake it. You are all working hard, yes? Yes! There's someone at the back going, "No, I'm not going to comply." If you're in a tox ic environment, it's not doing too much, it's doing too much that hurts you. The best thing about burnout, the most exciting thing about burnout, the most wonderful thing about burnout is that it's absolutely terrible. Its symptoms mirror classical symptoms of depression, and occupational burnout can trigger full-blown depression, even in folks who don't have a propensity for it. For folks watching on the live stream, we got I guess - folks who are really into psychology going "Yay" where or folks who are not very into the human condition! [Laughter].  You say that's fantastic, because we're on a first-named basis, we've drank together. How do I know if I'm burned out? And, we're all very cool, most of us are adults. We're not going to raise our hand. Please look visibly distressed. I understand that we all live in Britain. Most of us live in Britain. It's 2018. This has sort of become the standard. Up that little bar. Look visibly upset rather than raising your hand. Something like this if these points apply to you. Have you become cynical or critical at work? [Laughter]. I was like don't raise your hand. For folks on the life stream, there's someone jazz-handing it over there! Do you just drag yourself to work and then, once you're there, you're like, "Come on!" [Laughter]. . Have you become irritable or impatient with humans? [Laughter].  I said "become". If you started that way, that's not on me. Do you lack the energy to be consistently productive? Like, the people who wrote this, I got a little bit of suspicion, because consistently productive sounds Work Yourself Out of Debt kind of thing. Who lacks the energy to be consistently productive? Are you not able to feel good about the stuff that does get done? Oh, no. [Laughter]. Do you feel disillusioned about your job? Have you, my dear audience or listener, been using booze, food, snacks, escapes to stop feeling? Or to feel something different? Live stream people look weird because there are tons of people going yeah, booze and food. Or drugs as well. Like, you do you. Your sleep habits or appetite markedly changed? Aside from caffeine! Are you troubled by unexplained headaches, back aches, insomnia - some of this is just getting old, but un related to age, this stuff. Cool. You kept a very, very careful tally, because I'm not counting for you. You say, I only got four of those, so I feel like I'm completely fine. [Laughter].  I got some real exciting news. This survey was developed by the Mayo clinic, and, if you've answered one of these or more, you might be suffering from object occupational burn-out. Okay, all of that sucks, good job. How do I fix it? The one thing I would warn is I am not a therapist, I'm not a doctor, and I'm especially not your doctor. I would have you drink and then sleep it off! In real life, ... [Laughter]. Like, I'm officially not a doctor. Please, please, if you are suffering from anything that feels like this, immediately talk to your doctor. Go and see your GP. For those of you in the UK, energy the NHS while we have it. Speak to a medical professional. One thing I would warn is that recovering from Bourne-out is going to take a long time. I burned out spectacularly a year ago, and I'm still drinking and swearing on stage, like give yourself the time and patience to sort of ease into it. I'm going to break these two sets of tips down into two different things. So who here is burned out, and you've got time, and you can afford to take a big churching of time off work? I've no idea what to say to you people. Take some time off work! Go and ride your horses, whatever rich people do! [Laughter].  I genuinely don't know what rich people do. If you could take a giant chunk of time off work, go and do whatever weird things makes you happy. Like, it's not that I don't care, it's just that your problems aren't actually that bad. You've got horses, for God's sake. Just go! If you're not super rich, and you can't take a huge chunk of time off work to recover, there are a couple of little things that you can do. If you can't stop doing that thing, if you can't leave your job, if you can't leave the family life that's hurting with you, if you can't remove the inescapable stressor, look at things you can do. Please do less in ways that aren't going to damage your life. I want you to do emotional energy triage. Oh, wow.  I've got a list of all of these things to do that are destroying me. Which of these things can you put off, or which of these things can you ignore without damaging your life? You've probably got to pay rent. I bet you've got to pay your taxes. Please eat food, and please shower, but outside of that, what can you just push under the duvet for a little while? If you've got either the cash on hand, or the social capital, start outsourcing some of the stuff that exhausts you. Outsourcing doesn't have to be something you do with cash. This Christmas, I got my husband, who better had be in this Tamed talk [inaudible] to do all of the Christmas shopping and all of the holiday things. Does taking someone that you love, I hope, or who cares about you - I hope - and getting them to share the load a little bit more. Redistributing some of that work can be an incredible way to give yourself a little bit more emotional space. Everybody, repeat after me, and say no! Can you to that thing? 
AUDIENCE:  No! 
>> It feels [offmic] [Laughter]. There's clearly like a small pocket of glorious contrarians over here. People becoming burned out, they do it because they're helping so many people doing things, saying yes to other things. They're doing such a good job, and it's wonderful, and, if I say no, I'm going to be a bad person, what would they do without me? It's so good to help people. But you can't help people if you destroy yourself. You really need your meat computer to be, yeah, not on fire right now. If you are burning yourself out by doing too much and helping other people too much, I'm going to beg you, plead with you, ask you kindly, to put on your own safety mask before helping others. You can't really do much for other people if you have destroyed yourself. Selectively emotionally invest. This is my favourite thing. I've only recently learned how to do it. It is absolutely cracking the code to something glorious. When I say "selectively emotionally invest" I mean something really specific. As we've already mentioned, this is an all-ages talk. Does anyone know who mom swears are? Mom swears are when you really want to say the thing but you don't want to teach small people to say the thing. When I talk about selective emotional investment, I'm talking to you about sitting down and counting out how many hecks you've got left in your inventory. Those hecks are yours. You've only got so many left. You're going only to pass them out when you genuinely care. When you say, I've got this ridiculous thing, and I need you to do it now, and it's got a lot of urgency. I say, "Wow.  That sounds like a terrible problem I've got no emotional connection to." [Laughter]. I really hope that works out for you. It ties in there with saying no. It feels gross as the last couple of times, as the last fragments of your soul slip away, it feels so good. You need to keep your social contacts doing. Don't say the, "Wow.  That sounds like your problem," say it inside. Ask for help if you can. It can feel like you're drowning with nothing left to hold on to. Don't come to someone and say, "Here is the problem that's my whole life, please fix it." That's not super actionable. Saying, "Hey, I need a little bit more time at work. I need longer weekends, I need a break around the house." Selectively asking for help can really give you a tiny bit more room, if you don't have the cash and the horses to take a proper rich-person break. Recharge. The whole point of trying to recover from burn-out is trying to give yourself a break from those intense inescapable feelings of stress. If you're super into board games? Is there a ... yesterday? Apparently, those two people are board games. Read. Go running. Do the things that legitimately feel good to you. It will feel like escapism at first but you've earned yourself a little bit of escape. I think one of the most important things here is to start to practise forgiven us specifically for yourself. When we talked about ways to detect burnout, one of the big ones is you're unable to see your own successes. Folks who get burned out, it feels like depression. You don't feel good about yourself, you're hurting yourself with more work, everything's terrible, and it's an inescapable loop of me not swearing on stage. Hi, little cutekin. Be patient with yourself, forgive yourself. You're going to screw up. But you're caring more about your mistakes than you usually would. Forgive yourself. It is okay. Statistically, everything's probably on an individual and small scale okay. Globally, that's not on you. Medium term for yourself, try not to be a jerk. You're exhausted. You can't give the emotional energy of helping other people and fixing their lives but, man, you're going to be burned out for a while. You're going to need some friends along the way. Try not to hurt yourself by lashing out at yourself, and try not to hurt other people. It is a really fantastic opportunity to look around you and see what people in your life maybe aren't contributing in positive ways, but the folks who are there, the folks who are helping, be good to them with the energy you do have. So, for burn-out, please, please, please, if you can can, do less. Produce whatever - reduce whatever stressors you can. This is not an invitation for murder. This is not an arson thing! [Laughter].  Dramatically reduce your stressors without doing crime. Take the energy you have and invest that really selectively. This talk has been an incredible downer, so far. Saying burnout is a thing. You can break your brain, and, if you break it, it's broken a long time. But I want stop for a second and tell you a short story and suggest that being burned out can give you some magic powers. For a really quick detour, I'm going to tell you about the weird magical super powers I got from being extremely burned out. I get to give a lot of talks. I strongly recommend talks. You can do whatever you want. You can bring booze on stage. Please see me after class if you want to get into public speaking. I was at an event last year when I was burned out. I had a contact come up and say, "How are you doing! I didn't know you were pregnant!" [Laughter]. [Inaudible]. Back in the day, before I got burned out, I might have been really upset. I might have been like, oh, my God! Did I get fat? Is it the stress? Oh, man, I - should I not be on stage? What am I doing? Burn out does not care about any of that. So instead of freaking out, instead of getting flustered out, burned-out Jess was anyone who wants a hack for punishing people in other social situations. As Britishers, you will love this. If somebody said something that is beyond the pale, look at them with a completely neutral expression and stay quiet for at least three seconds. "I didn't know you were pregnant!" "I'm not". [Laughter]. This kid doubled down. Like, "Oh, but, but ...". [off mic]. You can repeat that pause. It is devastating. Oh, now, I suppose it happens with age, you know? Eventually, this talk us going to get around, and they're going to see this, and they're going to go, "Oh," this talk is better with swears. My suggestion is that if you do wind up burned out, that glorious recovery zone gives you the incredible opportunity to get on stage if you're afraid of it, drink obnoxious fruity booze while doing something professional, and just not giving the heck when you don't happen to pass out! Even if you are burned out, even if everything's terrible and going to be terrible for a while, for a year, however long it takes up for you to save up for those horses I want you to be gloriously forgiving to your brain, even when it's a little bit broken, it still loves you. Thank you. [Cheering] [Cheering and Applause]..  we've got a couple of questions from the audience. I will throw this blue cube back and hopefully it will work.  [Laughter]. 
>> Hello! 
FLOOR:  It works. Mine's not a question but I will give it to my friend after for a question. It is just that I'm also part of the first aid. I've been with St John Ambulance for a while, been around mental health nurses and doctors for a while, and, even though I'm not qualified, I have a message from them: the first one is the fact that it is important to know that at least that we know of, one out of four people in the whole world will go through some mental illness, most of them depression, even if they don't know it, through their lives. So it's completely okay to be recognised that you're depressed. It is not abnormal. You're not different from anyone. It's not the end of the world. Everyone, almost everyone, will go through it at a stage in their lives. It is very important to know that. Sorry, it really got through me to learn that statistic, so I thought I would share it. That's one. Two, it takes a lot of effort to recognise that something's wrong with you. Rather than be, "No, I'm okay," like you were saying, it's are you proud of yourself when you're not okay and you go through a burnout, or proud of yourself to recognise I have a problem, and I want to work on it, and I went to see my GP, or some sort of mental health professional? There is no stigma - or there is a huge stigma about environmental health, and there should not be, because depression is a normal fact of life. Please, please, please look after yourself. [Applause]. 
FLOOR:  Thank you, that was lovely. I have a question for you, Jess. 
>> I don't know where you are. 
FLOOR:  Here! Do you consider complacency a form of depression, and, if yes, how would you suggest a reasonable alternative to it? 
>> Like,  [inaudible] I feel like - I'm going to stay with this thought. I'm going to need to ponder a bit. Maybe. Part maybe. Sorry. 
>> I think we've got time for one more. 
>> Usually, the questions I can get after this with, "See your doctor, everything's terrible" but these are weirdly deep. 
FLOOR:  I wonder if you have any advice for detecting burn-out in others? People you interact with socially, or in employment, and what you would do to mitigate that to help them. 
>> To repeat this, in case the Cute softbox - oh, I repeat nothing. Looking for burnout in other people, especially if you're in a management role, or especially if you're in a leadership role, in a community, or in an organisation, it's incredibly useful. So, look for things like - look for sort of representations of the points we had, but some out loud. Folks who don't seem to engage with their successes, folks who are continually saying, "Oh, I'm ..." "Oh, I have no idea what I'm doing." For me, one thing I really noticed with other folks when sea that I had they're burn out, I will often hear people talk about, "I just need to get through X." "I just need to get through this next project." "I need to get through this event, this other thing." When you see people continually talking about, "I need to get through this one stretch of everything being terrible and my life will be okay", I think that's just how life works. I can that can be an early warning sign. Fab alous. Thank you all so much. 
>> Thank you, everyone. And, you can continue talking with Jess outside. Remember, EMF is entirely put together by volunteers, so, if you would like to be part of making an amazing event like this happen, go to the website, sign up for volunteering. There are lots of ways that you can contribute and help.  [Applause].