LGBTQIA+ Behaviour in Animals by Antonia Forster.
>> Thank you for your patience, folks. It's my pleasure to introduce Antonia Forster talking about LGBTQIA+ behaviour in animals. [Applause]. 
>> Hello, everybody. Thanks so much for coming. It's my pressure to be here at EMF. My background is in research. I started a PhD in animal behaviour and went into science communication and presenting full-time. So, my personal background is that I identify as performs which means I'm attracted - as bisexual as both men and women. Pansexual is valid. I'm also polyamorous which means I'm not monogamous which means I think it is possible to have more than one loving relationship at the same time. I'm also single, so clearly, that's working really well for me! But stand by it anyway. In my personal life, I don't always didn't always in the past come out as bi or polyamorous because there was so much misunderstanding in the world of LGBT and around polyamory. You here things about it is not right, immoral, or corrupting. There's one phrase in particular that really aggrieved me every time I heard it that LGBTQIA+ is somehow "not natural". Put your hand up if you ever heard that before? I'm sure nearly all of you. That's really depressing. It is a really, really common idea somehow that being, even things like gender non-conforming or women who don't fit traditional gender roles, we hear this word "unnatural", used to defend bigotry. I found that particularly interesting, because my area of expertise is biology which is the study of what is and is not natural. So I really wanted to break down this particular stereotype, that particular word use. As a result, I wrote a talk, I presented it as a few different festivals, at the Royal Society in Kew Gardens, and last December presented it as TedX in Bristol, and came out to my family as poly and bi in that talk. My parents said, "You don't see the animals doing this" which is literally what this talk is about! It made me realise that this is a necessary topic to talk about. I've looked up stats. There's a website called Pink News around the UK only 18 months ago which found four in ten British people agree that homosexual sex is not natural, and the percentage of respondents higher in other countries. The UK is generally quite liberal compared to other countries' views on those things. I really wanted to address what do we mean by the word "natural"? What does that actually mean? And is homosexuality or bisexuality, or sex in general, what do we see in nature? Natural means things we see in nature, things that are not exclusive to human. We do things that are not natural. We do things animals don't do. We drive cars, and we talk on phones, and we wear clothes. If you're going to talk about social constructs, I would argue that straight marriage is not natural because you don't see animals actually getting married. Unless you have an Etsy account and too much time on your hands! You don't see anyone protesting straight weddings on the basis they're not natural, because, frankly, that's obviously a ridiculous argument. The idea that everything natural is good and everything unnatural is bad is something called the Gaia fallacy. Cyanide is natural but it's not very good for you. So, clearly, that argument false apart. Do we actually homosexuality and bisexuality in animals? I started looked into the papers. Yes, we do. We see it all across the board. We see homosexuality, or homosexual behaviour in more than 1,500 different species of animals, and, in a third of those, it's a regular occurrence, so can't be put down to fluke. It's diverse. We see it in all kinds of animals, like elephants, lions, in giraffes, in dolphins, in several different species of penguins, in dragon flies. I don't know how you could even tell about a dragonfly! Interestingly, every species of great ape which is our closest ancestor evolution ly,. In bonobos, the vast majority are pansexual, and 60 per cent of their mating behaviour happens between two females. That is the norm for that species. We see homosexual animals raising young. In New York's Central Park Zoo, there are two chin-strapped penguins. A zoo keeper saw them spending tile together and taking turns trying to hatch a stone. That's the correct response. So, the zookeepers knew there was another hetero-romantic couple that had a spare beg. Often, a female penguin will lay multiple eggs and won't hatch them all. The zookeepers gave it to Roy and Silo. The egg hatched and turned into a healthy female chick called Tango. That was written up into a children's book. I like this corner of the room! Called Tango Makes Three. It's a children's book and teaches children love is what makes the family, not necessarily a traditional family structure. We clearly do see homosexual and bisexual and pan' sexual behaviour in other animals. What about gender fluidity. There is an important fluidity that has to be made between sex and gender. I like to use this diagram called the Gender Bred Person. Informative and delicious! This is a really nice diagram to explain the difference between your gender expression - that's how you appear, so it might include what you wear - your gender identity, who you are in your head, your orientation, that's who you love or are attracted to, and your biological sex, so that is your physical body. Those things don't have to appear to match. Someone who is transsexual, for example, might have a biological sex of one sex and a identity of the other. All of these things are along a spectrum. They're not a binary. It is easy for us to understand that gender expression is a spectrum because we can dress in a more masculine or feminine way and express ourselves in many ways in that spectrum. Your orientation is also a spectrum. There's something called the Kinsey Scale which argues that very few people are 100 per cent homosexual or heterosexual maybe, it's more common to fall along a spectrum. It's more complicated and changes over time. Your gender identity is also a spectrum. A lot of people may also identify as 100 per cent female or 100 per cent mail but - female or mail. Many will be queer or gender-fluid which is where it may change over time. From a biological, scientific point of view, we don't speak of animals as having gender. It is the identity construct. We have gender in the sense that we impose it upon them which is a more complex conversation but from here on in, I will only be talking about biological sex when referring to animals. So, in humans, we can broadly say that biological sex is determined by chromosomes. In biologically male foetuses, there will be an X and a Y chromosome, and in a biologically female, a X and an X. It is important to clarify that even at the most fundamental level where we're talking about chromosomal effects, there are variations. There people who may have XXY, 000, or XXX. Even if people do have XX, that affects their hormonal development which may be along a 100 per cent male developmental foetal path. Hormonal development affects your gonadal development and your phenotype. It's definitely not a binary. But can we assume that the same thing happens in animals in let's think about the birds and the bees. Let's start with the birds. So, birds have sex chromosomes like humans, but males have the ZZ chrome zone, and females have ZW. Females are the heterogamete and males on the homogamete. The model is by no mean the norm. In bees, it's radically different. The way a colony of works, typically, all the bees you're looking at will be females because the male bees have a short lifespan. In a colony of bees, there's one Queen who is the reproducer, and she's female. And there's lots and lots of workers which are her daughters. They're typically sterile. They don't typically mate. They're all female. The males are called drones. On the right here, they are different in terms of their body shape and eyes. They are born in order to have sex and then they die. It is a short life. A male bee doesn't actually do any work, so its own goal is to reproduce. The female reproducer, which is the Queen, can precisely control whether she is laying a male or female egg. If she ferret lives an egg, it becomes a - if she doesn't fertilise an egg, it becomes a male. Male bees come from unfertilised eggs which means male bees have no father which is an interesting thing to comprehend. Sex determination in bees is obviously very, very different to humans. Looking at animals allows us to reassess things that we assume are always true, maybe assumptions that we don't even recognise. For example, we tend to assume that male animals will have a penis and female animals won't, and that's not even something we see in humans all the time but not something we also see in animals. Examples like the spotted hyena. This is a female. She has genitals called a pseudo penis which is an enlarge clitoris. It looks identical to male genitalia. She likes to give birth through it. One way that researchers can actually tell female hyenas from male, it is difficult to sex them which is to determine their sex based on their genitals, but if they've given birth, they have a small amount of scar tissue has a lighter colour which is how you can tell if this one is a female. That's an assumption we might not even think about or realise we're making that association until we see something that's an exception. So far, all of the animals I've talked about have permanent sexes. By that, I mean they're either male or female, and that doesn't change over time. That's not the case for all animals. Some animals change sex over time, which is called a sequential hermaphrodite. Clown fish, there's typically only one female, the biggest and most important. Highest in the hierarchy. If she dies, a tragic affair, the next largest fish in the group which is a male will turn into a female to replace her. That would make the movie Finding Nemo entirely different! But I would like that. There are also animals which are both sexes at the same time. This is something called a simultaneously hermaphrodite. Slugs and snails are an example. The banana slug's name that is domico phallus which means "enormous penis". When they want to mate, banana slugs they laterally exchange sperm. But actually, their genitals are so large that they become stuck. If that happens, they have to do apofellation which means chewing it off. So, that's natural! Sea slugs take it a step further. Sea shrug genitals are sharp like a spear, and they don't actually have a female opening to receive genitals. They actually just stab it wildly into the side of the other individual, and that act is called "traumatic insemination", and it is traumatic. Aptly named. Each individual wants to stab the ear whilst not being stabbed themselves. This has evolved into a competitive behaviour known as penis fencing. Each individual wants to stop  stab the other and wants to avoid the trauma itself. Then it gains because the other individual is the one that has to invest and carry the young. For different reasons, penis fencing is what you see in grey whales. I didn't include a picture of that. It's strong for my talk. Feel free to Google it. Don't blame me if you get put on a list! [Laughter].  You can see that the sexual diversity, and the different ways that animals mate in the wild is really, really diverse. It is really hard to say what is and isn't natural. Are there any angles that have fewer than two sexes? Are there any that have one sex? There are. This is a lizard called the desert lizard. In this species, there are never any males at any time. The females just lay eggs which are clones of themselves in a process called parthenogenesis. Snakes have been known to do it, hammer-head sharks have been documented to do it, but it's rare for a species to do that exclusively. They will only reproduce by laying eggs which don't need to be fertilised. What I find really interesting, though, is they don't do this all the time. The female only lays eggs when she has been mounted or climbed on top of by another female, something called pseudo copulation. They are an empowered species, I think. That made me wonder if there are species with only one sex, are there species with more than two sexes? This is where I had to lead behind the Buzzfeed and look at the research. They do exist. This is a single-celled animal called tetrahymena themafina and it has 17 different mating types which are the same as sexes. What is particularly interesting is that the mating type of one tetra has no bearing on its young - or I suppose "young" isn't the right word - but the offspring it produces can be of any mating type and reproduce one of any seven mating types. It's able to mate with any type except its own which is why we functionally use them as equivalent to sexes. This is a fungus called scitzophyllum.. has 28,000 different mating types, which is absolutely incredible. It is to do with the way the genome recombines. It has got four different places to recombine. It is not unusual for fungi to have different mating types, but - fungi to have different mating types. To look at at all of this research into the animal kingdom and looking at the way sex works, or doesn't work, the different behaviours that we see, and the fact that sex is not only not a binary but that species can survive with more than one or two, it is hard to say whether something is or not natural. That's what I want everyone to take away from this. Just that, if you hear anyone saying, using the phrase, "It's not natural" to try and defend bigotry, not only you should not be using biology to defend bigotry, it is a farcical argument. I encourage you to take this away and use it as an  ammunition in that kind of suggestion. Thank you very much. [Cheering and Applause]. I'll be waiting for a Q afterwards out there, I guess, or in here, where everyone collates. If you have questions for me, feel free to find me after the talk. I'm happy to take questions, or if you have any questions that you're not able to grab me, then do please tweet me, and I will be happy to answer any questions that you have. Thanks very much for coming. Have a great weekend. Thank you. [Applause]. #