Spider Silk - Hacking Nature's Strongest Fibre by Michelle Strickland
>> While we are waiting for the streaming, can I have a plea from the organising Italy, please volunteer after to do kitchen work, bar work. ... . Excellent. There is an incentive there for you to help and make - 
FLOOR:  Put the microphone on! 
>> Is that better? 
>> Basically, please volunteer, we are running short of people to do jobs. If you volunteer, you can get food tokens. Please, please help. That would be great.  I would like now to introduce our next speaker, who is Michelle Strickland talking about spider silk -. 
>> It's great to be here. I'm Michelle Strickland. I've been working at the University of Nottingham for four years. I live at the back end after spider for a living, but there's more than that! Spider silk is my subject. Hopefully, you will learn a bit and enjoy it. I'm around for questions afterwards. I did mostly write this talk yesterday so it might be as understandable as it could be but I'm happy to explain stuff later. So spiders have been around for a little while. The earliest fossil evidence is 400 million years. Soon after that we see the first evidence of silk. It's not the use we see today. They continued to evolve from that. That's what we started to see if we have evidence for. I checked this morning at the present time, there are 47,688 recognised species of spider. That number goes up every week, and there's been at least 4,000 species added. We still don't know today just how many spiders there in in the world, and we're still learning a lot about them. Let's talk about silk. Spiders have worked out a myriad of different ways to utilise their silk. They're one of the few types of animals that spin silk throughout their lifetimes, and they do it to great effect. The to two, they capture spirals. They think of these beautiful spirals. But they use silk or other things - to line burrows. They use it to wrap their egg sacks. I like it as a physical gill. The diving bell spider is the only spider to live in fresh water in ponds. One of the adaptations, they can spin a silken web under water, pull bubbles of air down from the surface, release it under the web, and they form a bubble of air under water that is held there by the silk. The really cool thing about this is this web allows for gas diffusion, so oxygen in the surrounding water is diffuse into the bubble, and these spiders can stay under water for weeks at a time without having to eventually gills. Spiders are useful to us as humans. It goes back hundreds of years. Ancient Greeks used to collect silk for wound dressings. It helped with the healing process. Individual strands of silk have been used in begun sites, micrometres. One of the earliest telescopes used one so they could measure the distance and movement between stars and planets. You can spin it into a cloth as well. About I think ten years ago now, in fact, more recently than that, there was a beautiful exhibit where a group had collected silk from gold en spiders and spun it into this beautiful cape and into a shawl which is on display and going around the world as well. On a medical scale, researchers have been looking at spider silk and saying we can use silk in medicine. It's been done before and we can do it again. We can use silk to promote cellular growth. Basic studies if you put in a line of silk where a damaged nerve can be with or without stem cells, you get nerve regeneration. That's really cool. I would love to see more of that. But to collect silk, it's a difficult thing, so you can't just milk a spider, or like a silkworm where they spin it out. You have to take it from the spider. Pinning down stops them cutting the silk. You can farm spiders. But the problem you have with farming spiders is, if you put a lot of spiders in a box, when you come back later what you have is one larger well-fed spider! They're not very good for farming. They're hard to keep, so it's time-consuming and expensive. One of the things we like to do is make synthetic silk. We can make it larger and in vast quantities. This has been done in plants and animals, so you may or may not have heard of the spider goats in America but silk genes have been put into tobacco plants and potatoes. The problem with this is you've got these random bits of silk floating around. Plants - there is other stuff in goat milk besides silk. There's a lot of purification to do there. Before we go into how to make silk, we need to learn first what kind of spider silk is. There's no-one conspired  spider silk. Any spider on site will be able to make seven difference kinds of silk which has different properties. If we think of the capture web with the spiral on there, radial lines that lead through that web, they're the frame. They need to be strong. They need to hold that web in place so that when flies come bashing into it, it doesn't break. That web then holds the capture spiral. The spiral is two types of silk. It is a very stretchy, elastic silk which is designed to absorb the impact. That's then coated in a glue, because then once you've got your prey, you want it to stay there. These silks are held together by a third kind of cement, which is a - no other - other kinds of silk. Wrapping silk is tough because you need to restrain your pay. And egg-casing silk which is anti-microbial. All of those mixtures and functions come out of one spider. Not all spiders make one type of silk. A tarantula has only one kind of silk gland and will make one or two kind of silk president the garden ones we see have different glands which are specialised to produce a different type of silk. Having said that, there are a lot of similarities between how these different silks are made. A basic diagram of a spider silk gland. On the left-hand side is where silk proteins are made which are the building blocks which will eventually become fibre, the glue, or the coating. These are then stored as a liquid inside the sack in the middle. Then, when the spider needs the silk the long thin ducts is where the magic happens. I say magic, but we don't fully understand it. As the liquid silk travels down this duct, it undergoes dehydration. Individual parts experience mechanical stress, and there is a change in the acidic properties of the ducts. This all contributes to individual silk proteins folding together and forming the fibre that then comes out of the end. This is where it comes out of, the spinarettes of the spider. Each of these nozzles, each of these spinarettes are innovated, muscular, they can be moved, and the spider can have control of the thickness of the diameter of the silk that it produces. If the spider is hungry, it will make a thicker, stronger silk to make sure that dinner doesn't run away. What is silk really made of? Simplifying enormously, it is just a collection of amino acids folded together in a specific way. To get there, you take the DNA of the spider, which is the master code. You make a copy of code, and then that code tells you which amino acid to stick on in the right place at the right time. You throw that copy away and continue. And how these amino acids form, the different structure in the different properties. And those amino acid s spiral round into a spiral, you will get a silk that is more elastic and stretchy. If they fold together into a sheet, it will be stronger and tougher. If we do that more, if we take a silk gene, they all share a common layout. If you imagine this as a bit like a book laid out in front of you. At either end of the silk, you've got the start and the end of these protein building blocks. These are important for the forming of silk fibre - this we know. The section in the middle is a repeating section. These are the parts that give the silk the properties. This is just short section s - a short or a long section of instructions repeated over and over and over again. Silk genes are enormous. The important thing is this structure is broadly the same irrespective of which kind of silk you're looking for, whether you have a glue or a fibre. [Off mic]. This is enough that we can make synthetic silk. We can take four repeating regions, and the finishing, the end terminal of a silk gene, we can move that into a bacteria, and we can use that to produce synthetic fibres. What is interesting is if you include the other end, the other terminal region. This is how the spider stops the sleek from pre-emptively forming a fibre while in the storage ducts. You have the end of the gene which says, "I want to make a fibre," and the end of the gene which says, "No, no, no, not yet, when the time is right." If we're going to make basic synthetic silk, we need the repeat regions. To get that there, we need to modify bacteria. You can easily modify bacteria without hacking the genome. You've got the nucleus going on in the genome of the bacteria but they have these circular pieces of DNA which the bacteria use to transfer the information between them. If we've got this antibiotic resistance gene, let's share it, they can do it on the circular piece of DNA. We can hijack that and use it to make silk. We can take the sir Clark pieces of DNA out, cut them open and paste in this section of the spider silk and the bacteria goes I've got new information, let's make that protein. And then so you can breed lot of these bacteria. You can put them in big vats, you can - it's much easier to extract that silk to purify it. [Off mic]. The nice thing is, when you synthetic silk protein, it's still a liquid. It hasn't formed the fibre yet. Because of this version of silk, because we don't have that break, we can literally hold the flask of - and you can tilt and mix it. These fibres form. I think that's amazing, and such a lovely thing to watch, but, the important thing is, they're uneven. They're not as useful as they might be. Utilising mercury fluidics, we it take a thin tube, put it into a bath, replicating the dehydrating environment of the spider and reel out a line of silk of consistent width and diameter. That's really cool which means we can make silk. The next step is to go off and do stuff with it. It's - industries are secret about how they work. Both are, to my knowledge, there isn't anything on the market where you can walk into a shop and buy something made of spider silk. There's been promises, north face - North Face were going to make a moon parka made out of spider silk. As far as I know, that didn't come out of fruition. Another American company, they, if you go on their website, you can buy a silk tie, mixing spider silk with wool. It is not pure silk but again, it's not bad. The best thing I've seen so far, although what the product is, Adidas and AM Silk make these biodegradeable shoes which they say is made from a synthetic kind of silk. You can buy those. They were available in Adidas stores as a limited he had contingency. What I'm really this is how do you modify silk? The easiest thing to do is take something really exciting and stick it on to the silk and see what happens. A couple of studies have looked at carbon nanotubes or structures. The first study on the left took a bundle of spider silk straight from the cider, reeled it up, and rubbed it with water and separated those fibres out. While they didn't see any increase in the tensile properties, so the spider silk didn't get any stronger, they could make it electrically conductive. And, there are things that you could do with that, so you're looking at compatible electronics, or fine, strong sensors. Including of which I will happily talk to you over a beer about, is this research where they fed spiders carbon nanotubes, took silk produced by the spiders, and they found the carbon nanotubes were incorporated into the silks, and the silks had tensile properties ten times stronger than the native silk. [Off mic]. ... myself and a few other biology spider people are suspicious of this work for a number of reasons. It seems very odd that you could feed spiders something they would then know to digest and move into their silk glands. It's like me drinking this pint of this stuff and having graphene-coated hair. If this is something that can be replicated, it would be very, very interesting that we would look further into. Something again that cropped up which is quite interesting is you can combine spider silk with methyl ions which increases tensile properties. I'm not sure where we are going with that because it was ten years ago, but interesting so see about. My favourite one is we can hake the - we did hack -- we can hack the silk itself been we can starve the bacteria a modified amino acid that has almost an extra structure on it so you can stick stuff to this amino acid. When the bacteria produces the silk, there is no difference in the overall structure of the silk because the amino acid behaves in the normal way but it means you can chemically attach things to the gnawed gnawed. That could be fluorescent molecules, so, when you make the silk, it glows in the dark. It could be antibiotics, growth hormones - things that would change or advance medical technology. You could make a kind of silk scaffold if someone was having a bone repaired, you can lay it over the bone, as as the silk biodegrades, you give whatever medication you want to give right where it wants to be. The theory, which is being worked on. We will see where that goes in a few years' time. I'm very interested in that, Andy would love to see [off mic]. That's all time going to cover today. Thank you for coming and listening to me waffle. You can contact me on Twitter where I'm happy to take questions, and happy to take questions here. I should acknowledge the people down the left-hand side for monies and support and letting me indulge myself thus. [Applause]. 
FLOOR:  What's the earliest fossil evidence for silk? 
>> 374 million years ago. I can't remember the name given to the spider but they didn't have spinarettes as such but ventral plates, these spigots where the silk was forming. I believe the fossils show silk coming out of there. We don't know what the spiders did with the silk or anything about the silk, but that's the fossil record we have at the moment. 
FLOOR:  Is spider silk different from silkworms, and why do you concentrate on the spider? Is it because silkworms only make silk at a certain part of their lives before. 
>> Yes, spiders use it throughout. Silkworms build it for only one purpose to make the cocoon, not using it to catch prey. On a basic chemical basis, they're basically the same stuff. It's the same kind of amino acid s but they use a different range, and the structure of silk worms that you get is different. Spider silk, you get the pure fibre coming out, but with silkworms you get two fibres, bound together with a layer of glue, a serotonin coat. When you buy clothing, you have to dissolve the glue before they can be woven. There's a small structural difference. There's definitely a difference in the amino acids between them. 
FLOOR:  You've answered what I was about to ask. I was surprised that the silk had evolved after spiders had split off from other arthropods. The two silks evolved separately for the spiders and the silkworms? 
>> Yes, spiders have evolved several times. Spiders and insects have evolved separately. There are some arachnids that will use silk for a period in their lifespan. I can't tell you what they are, but silk has evolved several times across the animal kingdom. It's not a unique thing. It seems to be that spiders are not themselves unique, one or two species of insect that do use silk throughout their lifetimes, but spiders as a massive group we they use silk from the moment they hatch to the moment they die. 
>> Thanks very much, Michelle. We will transfer to the next talk. [Applause]. 