Things That Go Bump On The Net by Henry Cooke.
>> So, welcome to day number 2 of EMF Camp? Good afternoon. You're all seated and relaxed. So, without further ado, I would like you to give a very warm welcome to Henry Cooke and things that go bump on the internet! [Applause]. 
>> Yay! Thank you, everybody. Thank you EMF Camp for having me, and thank you to everybody for turning up. I will start with a disclaimer:  this talk is on the version 0.8. There are probably bugs. By continuing to sit here, you agree to be bound by the terms of my beta test agreement! If you think I've missed a trick, or a particularly good story, please come and find me later. I've barely started scratching the surface of the subject. It turns out that this is an ambitious topic to try and fit into half an hour. I will be glossing over a few things, passing by others at speed. I will assume that everyone is smart and has Google and if I say something and leave it, you can look it up later. I've published a lot of notes online. I'll put the links to that at the end. Let's get started, 174 years ago. On 24th May 1884, Samuel Moore September a long-distance telegraph message. Does anyone know what the content of that message was? Someone? A few people. You will enjoy this, then: [dramatic music]:  You can't help read this except as monumental hubris where or a premonition on Moore's part. It frames the telegraph as a gift from a higher power. From God to Morse, to the rest of us. Morse is merely channelling God's will. Four years after Morse transmission, two sisters heard knocking and banging sounds at night not being made by anyone else in the house. In time, the Fox sisters started to communicate with the entities making the sound. On 31 March, Kate invited it to repeat the snappings of her fingers. It did. She then asked it to knock out her age and that of their sisters. It did this too. 12, 15, 17. They devised a code which included yes, no, letters of the alphabet. Then they fled the house, moved to nearby Rochester. They became famous, demonstrating the first paid public seance and went on to successful careers as spirit mediums until their confession in 1888 that it was all a hoax. By that time, it was far too late. Spiritual ism had taken hold in the popular British and American imagination. In his book Haunted Media, Jeffy Sconce suggests that the stories of the sisters and Morse are not - the telegraph had brought with it a whole new way of thinking about communication with other bodies. Once you've abstracted communication out to something that can happen instantly with no idea of who or what is on the other end of the line, then it's easy to take that abstraction one step further and imagine communication with entities on other planes of existence, communicating through far more ethereal means than a simple wire. At this point, I should mention radio and electronic voice phenomenon - EVP - but that would take half an hour by itself. It's one to look up later if you're interested and you don't already know about it. 83 years on from Kate and Margaret's tapping spirit, in 1931. Accounts of a contact with strange creatures or spirits weren't that uncommon. The spiritualist movement had been running for a while now, and people had been communication with voices from other planes of existence with some regularity. In an isolated farm house on the Isle of Man, the Irving family - Jim, Maggie, and their 12-year-old daughter - reporting hearing scratching and rustling noises coming from inside the hollow walls. They were apparently made by a trapped mongoose. One with yellow fur, hands and feet, born in New Delhi in 1852. They knew this, because Jeff, as he called himself, spoke to them. I went to a talk a while ago about Jeff, and they showed us archive footage of the daughter being interviewed. She imitated Jeff's voice, so I will do my best attempt at do her imitating Jeff for you now. "I know who I am but I shan't tell you. I am a freak. I have hands and I have feet, and, if you saw me, you faint. You would be petrified, turned into stone or a pillar of salt." Of course, Jeff couldn't speak at first. He started to make gurgling noises, and with encouragement from the isolated family, he picked up English. Jeff could also speak the odd phrase of Russian, Spanish, Welsh, Hebrew, Manx and Hindustani. "I was brought to England from Egypt by a man named Holland. When I was in India, I lived with a tall man with a green turban on his head. I lived with a Hunchback." As Jeff's confidence grew, he started to explore the island and brought gossip back that he had heard after catching rides on the buses. He gained a nest under the family's room which the family called Jeff Sanctum where they left bacon why sausages there. Through his confidence, Jeff's story spread around the island, and, in 1930 two, it was picked up on by the Isle of Man Examiner and the Times. The farm house was getting frequent visits from journalists and par normal investigators. Jeff never appeared to any of them although he would rattle and scream while they were there. He saved particular ire for one Harry Price and his Dictaphone. I won't speak into it. I will smash his windows. I will drop a brick on him as he lies in bed." Of course, the most likely explanation is that Jeff was an imaginary companion created by a creative girl's reaction to prolonged isolation and boredom. The story of Jeff adds another layer to the spiritualist legend, though. If we accept that Jeff was a hoax, then it was one enabled and accelerated by the communication technologies of the day. The daughter's imagination was fed by the information that made it to the farm house through books, newspapers, and radio. This is what makes Jeff more interesting than a usual haunting where the voices bang on about the ethereal mysteries on the other side of the veil. I'm the fifth dimension, I'm the eighth wonder of the world. The story itself spread on the same networks that fed it. The tabloid press knowing a good story who they saw one gave extensive coverage to Jeff, and, by 1935, he had made it as far as the Hong Kong Telegraph. The story is so potent that it's continued to propagate down through time to the present day, jumping from newspapers, to books, to magazines, and the internet, and even to a field in Gloucestershire in 2018. At the last EMF Camp I talked about number stations that existed in Europe in the Cold War mostly broadcasting strings. Numbers. Most people think these were coded channels broadcast by state agencies although no-one confessed to running one directly. I said the thing that I found interesting about the numbers stations was the way they acted as a kind of generator of folk tales, and I reckon that you could draw a line back from the stories and numbers stations spawned to Camp Fire ghost stories. Today, I'm talking about my attempts to trace that line, how existing folklore makes its way into how we think about technology and how technologies themselves generate their own folklore. One of the earliest examples I could find of a technology spawning its own distinct folklore as opposed to existing ideas about spirits manifesting in a new space was Titvilus who crept into print shops into errors into carefully laid out type when the printers why sleeping. There's an idea in Japanese - that is the wrong - 0.8. There's an idea in Japanese folklore of spirits which tools acquire when they get old enough. These spirits are harmless enough, mostly playing whimsical pranks on their owners, unless you annoy them by throwing them away too soon or being wasteful. Twitch ing frogs' legs with electricity in the late 18th century gives us marry Shelley's Frankenstein, and, a few steps later, gives us the killer AI myth in the Terminate colour where an artificial child wreaks revenge on its creator. One of the first examples I could find in the twentieth century are gremlins. They're these mischievous little imps said to infest aeroplanes, and they had an advanced knowledge of aeronautical engineering which they used for definitely. It would be common for pilots to blame mechanical aircraft on the gremlins, some even claimed that they could communicate with them on a psychic level causing their vision to fog or to see mountains which were not there. Here's an account from World War Two. "I'm very aware of my surroundings. As I go higher, I notice an unusual sound coming from the engine. The instruments went right. I saw an entity staring at me. Then I look at the aircraft's nose. And there it is. Another one hanging in there. Dancing lizard. But I was perfectly fine. I sensed we were in good shape but the weird things were still there looking at me. Kept going at it, pounding the plane with all their might. They appeared to be laughing with big mouths opening, looking at me, hitting the plane with their long arms, trying to pull stuff. I have no doubt in my mind that they were trying to crash it. I managed to stabilise the flight and I saw critters falling off the aircraft. I don't know if they jumped from my plane to a different one. I have no idea." Let's assume that the gremlins are not really wheel. Let's put aside the observation that they are pretty good examples of the tricks ark time. The most widely held theory is that oxygen can be in short supply at high altitude and lack of it can easily cause hallucinations. Other writers suggest that the gremlins had a morale-boosting function other than blaming faults on the maintenance crew. I think - in other words, a plane can fail, in other words, hard to understand. Once you hit a certainly level of complexity, why not gremlins? It seems as plausible as anything else. It's like the dark side of that famous quote about sufficiently advanced technology, that I won't waste anyone's time about by repeating here. I think we can see the effect at work when people make up stories to explain things to themselves. Julie Car ten  penner - Car penner says this. Talking about how groups of people create stories when they don't know something works. The thing I liked about number stations wasn't that they represented this tantalising powerful mist of the radio network but they also drew people together to try to figure out what they were doing, and why they were there. These stories later intersect with the internet, the next generation of network, all kinds of weird things fly off. There are people photos appear, allegedly of site visits to defunct stations, staining YouTube channels extending on the idea of hiding coded secrets in plain sight. The raw material of the story, of the number stations, recordings, logs, theories of who might be broadcasting them and why, get extended on by many imaginative minds. Arthur Frank writing about how stories work socially says this: he's talking about how storey tellers and people who listen to stories are working from a shared culture, and storey-telling is a process of building that they do between themselves. He also says that this kind of process of creating a shared story is fundamentally social because you're sharing these fragments between yourselves. It's these social aspects of story-telling that I think gives us the modern meme culture, the shared narratives and social functions of a story multiplied hugely by network effects. A story like Slenderman who pops up to make super creepy images. A faceless, gangly creature lurking in the woods behind some oblivious kids. However, the story takes on its own momentum as it comes into contact with many more creative minds adding their part to the legend. Playing with fragments of folklore to create an ongoing shared narrative, popping up over the internet, implicating the Slenderman in atrocities large and small. Slender Man has its roots in our deep folklore.. many of the characteristics are noted to fiction and folklore characters that preceded him. He makes a connection between Slender Man and that of middle European fairy tales - pointing out that - luring humans into traps, distorted or indeterminate body features, child abduction, and a general air of un-Heimlich, all have precursors in traditional folk tales. Slender man turned out to be such a powerful story that it affected old media. While writing it, I spotted these movie posters appearing on my commute which freaked me out quite a lot! I'm sure it's a coincidence. So, we've seen the way that we think and tell stories about our technology, it actually has close ties to the ways that humans have always told stories about the world and interpreted phenomena. I want to spend the rest of this talk examining one particular strand much folk archetype, the Arakular Machine. I will start the story of Roger Bacon, and his alchemic bronze head. He wasn't the first to cast a head from bronze. Apparently, Pope Sylvester II made one in the ninth century. It was said to be built by Renaissance makers in the twelfth and 13th centuries although written accounts don't appear in the 16th century. These heads were apparently able to, after sufficient engineering, and/or alchemic effort, put any question to them or make predictions about the future. Some could only answer yes or no. It's the account of Friar Bacon which became the most serious to the 16th playwright, Robert Green. In his play, based on a true story, Bacon and assistant miles spend a lot of time and effort building the bronze head where in the inward parts thereof, there were all things like as in a natural man's head. Finally, they animated it which required keeping a continuous watch, and also their continue  continual feud of the six hottest symbols which are plant extracts to you and me. After three weeks of this, Bacon fell asleep while exhausted. While he sleeps, the head boots up and says three things. Still awake, freaks out so hard that he knocks the head over, and it shatters. He freaks it - bacon sleeps through the whole thing. Years later, in 1837, Charles Babbage theorised, given enough information, an entity might distinctly foresee and absolutely predict for any, even the remote period of time, circumstances and future history of every particle. He was thinking about a process which could model the whole universe and thus predict the future. 
>> "Alexa, what is the weather today? Where shall we go today? Alexa, what is the weather in Bangkok? 
>> It is 81 degrees. 
>> The idea of a machine which can answer any question has been with us for at least as long as we've been making machines. The original mechanical Turk is in here too, the robot which was not a robot. The idea that an engineer's ingenuity can tell the future is interlaced with the Faustian myth of being granted great knowledge through esoteric means but that knowledge comes as a price. I think this archetype is alive and well in the ideas surrounding discourse in big data and machine learning, and it's not just me. I think that alchemy is getting a bad rap here. It did lay the foundations for a lot of modern science, medicine and chemistry. It did have its fair share of rituals which were enacted because the rituals themselves were thought to be powerful. This is the analogy that Google's researchers are making. They claim that most people doing AI - AI - are following rituals they've learned without really understanding the under lying science. Input data sets and training parameters are tweaked according to recipes on the internet or learn and accumulate by trial and error. I suppose you could call that folk knowledge. There is another problem in AI. You can't open it up and see what is inside. Sure, we understand what is happening inside in a neural network when set the conditions that allow it to create itself, and we know how to measure those outputs and tweak the whole system so we get the results that we want. We can't actually look inside the neural net as it is running, or at least it's very - it's infamously difficult to do a good visualisation of that. We don't even know why neural nets are so  effective, let alone what is going on in there. We are creating black boxes. As long as we keep doing the rituals, the systems will behave! It never ceases to amaze me, as an industry, we are actively involved in a project of hiving off more and more important data processing and decisions to machine-learning systems and neural networks. Self- driving cars for sure, but setting insurance premiums, making health care decisions, getting bail, predicting someone's chances of offending, running the stock market. At the heart of all of these systems? Faith. Faith in unknowable black boxes. This is a quote by William Stahl from God in a Chip how people - how religion and technology and how they intersect. If you're interested, get it. He goes on to say that there are dangers in treating technology like magic. Scientists and engineers become priests and wizards whose pronouncements can't be understood by the public, and implicitly should not be challenged. So, I could end here on a pithy summary that raps everything in a neat little bow. But that would seem like cheating. We like neat resolutions, happy findings, elegant reversals, thematic resonance. We like frameworks which leaves us susceptible to a narrative exploit. If a story seems to fit a pattern we know, we will accept it more easily because we know that story on a fundamental level. Superstar CEOs are a unique fit for the hey rather's journey. A new shiny things is a gift from the gods, powerful and capricious. All-knowing AI systems become minor deities capable of doling out judgment on us. The deployment of these archetypes dulls our creative faculties, makes us more prone to magical thinking, absolves us of responsibility as we get swept up in the narrative. Just as we like our stories to follow order and structure, we like to think that our technologies are the products of science, rigorous, rational thought, but they're also the products of people - people like you and me sitting down at a keyboard, a drafting table, a drawing board, and bashing out their opuses. Those people are all embedded in a culture. They grew up on particular stories. We can't help but have the way that we think shaped by those stories. In a way, those stories are what taught us to think. We repeat those patterns without even knowing it. So, I'm not going to end this neatly, but if I'm going to leave you with one thought, it's this: keep alert. Reserve special scepticism for those stories which seem too neat, too powerful, too universally true, because they might just be the regurgitation of our shared folklore to the bamboozlement of all involved. Thank you. [Cheering]. [Applause]. Perfect timing. 
>> We have time for a few questions. I have this wonderful microphone. If you have a question, this microphone will fly to you. Raise your hand if you have a question, please? Anyone? 
FLOOR:  Have you ever tried inventing your own folk story? 
>> Have I ever tried inventing my? 
FLOOR:  Your own story? 
>> Strange you ask that! On the badges, you can - you should be able to download an app called 23 million stories which generates 23 short stories. Not all at once! But yes I've done a lot of work before this talk. I work in generative language, Twitter bots, that kind of thing, generative short stories. I haven't tried to make my own universally true bit of folklore yet. Give me a time. 
>> Throw the microphone in the general direction. People will hopefully pass it on. Yes, you've got the concept. Thank you! Give me the second. Try again. 
FLOOR:  Do you have any predictions about what kind of folklore we may see in the future, given current technology? 
>> That's a good question. There's a big thing in systems design where we are taught that making things seem seamless, seem natural in the UX and the flow, we're taught that's a good thing, we should try to hide complexity from people, right? We should make things appear magical. I think, as systems get more complex, and we hide more stuff, then the amount of stuff that people have to make up to try and understand what is going on gets bigger, right? So I think that's, I guess, there's that. There is also the yes, the kind of - I wouldn't want to hazard a guess at what specifically might happen but I suspect that we will see the popular imagination of how things work from how they actually work. I think that something only going to get bigger as systems get more complex and we hide more of their details. Don't do that! 
>> Any further questions? If so, please raise your hand? All the way at the back. Could you pass the microphone there. 
FLOOR:  Do you see value in leaning into the folklore? 
>> Yes, absolutely. To contradict exactly what I just said, I - so my work-work, I work in the BBC for research and development, and I've spent the last couple of years looking at voice-interactive devices. Those devices are really dumb. Sold on this promise of being this all-knowing AI but when you get to developing stuff for it, it's not AI, you make decision trees and big branching then-if statements. They're sold on the promise of being an all-knowing AI. If you're good with your writing, you can totally play on that and pretend your system knows more than it does. We've made a few games that do that. We made games where we write AI characters that are smarter than the AI, a weird magician stage trick kicks in as if you're minuting enough with the way you - manipulating enough as you use language - I also think there's a sort of - I think it's also useful for sort of activism and presenting an alternative vision of how things might be. I went to a thing called Haunted Machines at the Impact Festival last year. There was a guy there called Scott Smith and he was talking about how if you're good enough about telling your alternative visions of the future, if you get really good at telling that sorry, that becomes a weapon for stories by governments or countries you or companies you may not like. It becomes a powerful totem because people love stories, which I'm sure my mate will be talking about later. I'm done! 
>> If you could pass the microphone back to the front, if you would be so kind. All the others, please give a big round of applause to Henry who has to do this talk again in two years! [Applause] 