Urban Beekeeping - how to get started by Henry Sands
>> This is the talk on how to get started in urban beekeeping. Please welcome Henry Sands. 
>>  As a bit of a prerequisite to this talk, it won't be on techniques of beekeeping. This will be the practicalities and investment that you need to put forward to be an urban beekeeper. So, me:  my name's Henry. I'm an urban beekeeper from London, or Essex in the Barking area. It's close enough. I'm a techie by trade, a sys admin. This is something nice and completely different for me. Previous to keeping bees in London, I used to keep bees in a rural environment on the Isle of Wight where I kept bees for a number of years. I've only been an urban beekeeper for one year. Take everything I say with a huge grain of salt. Why would you want to be a beekeeper? Bee-keeping is insanely to everything else. It's a mixture of completely unique skills, animal husbandry, practical stuff. You're outside. There's no reason to have a phone, and it's a complete getaway from your standard everyday tech life and a really, really good disconnect. It's a great conversation piece. You guys are all here listening to me talk. You can get honey. It's not guaranteed. It very much depends on what the bees want to do for you, and of course you enjoy suffering. So, as we will see the guarantees, the three Ss - everything in the beehive is sticky. You will get sweaty. I'm in a lovely bee suit with wellies and gloves. Our - you're out in the 30-degree heat in this, three or four hours at a time, depending on how many you have to do. You tip your wellies out at the end which is standard practise! It's not comfortable. You will get stung. If you're squeamish about getting stung by bees, this is not the hobby for you! [Laughter]. You don't get stung as much as people on would expect. A lot say, you open a hive, bees everywhere, getting stung. They only sting you on two occurrences: either they're a really aggressive hive and there's something wrong with them, or you accidentally squashed a be. How many people have stood on a bee in the grass that's eating closer and got stung in the foot? Yes, a decent number of people. That's the usual way you get stung. You squash the bee, and it's going to sting you. For bees flying around, they have no interest in stinging you whatsoever. Advantages as disadvantages to urban beekeeping, and advantages did disadvantages to rural beekeeping. If we go down the urban list, people have gardens, and there are lots of gardens and plants in urban environments. The biodiversity in an urban environment is much higher than the rural environment. This is a benefit, and it's a drawback. So the benefit is you get very interesting honey, and you get constant different flavours every time you take honey. Honey doesn't just taste of honey. If you want to come to the village afterwards, I might have jars, people can taste. It is very cool. There are a lot of flowering trees which you do not get a huge amount of in the countryside, so, parks, road, parks, flowering trees because they're pretty. You're less susceptible to drought because people water their gardens. In the countryside, fields get parched, we saw this this year very, very heavily. As soon as you get a drought environment, flowers don't produce nectar any more, and once they don't produce nectar, there's nothing for the bees to turn into honey.? In the city where people use hoses, and they water their garden, that's much less of an issue, and we saw that heavily this year. The city beekeepers did very, very well this summer. The rural bee-keep ers suffered greatly. If you get a long drought, the bees can sort of die of thirst as well but that's very rare. Pollute ant aren't really a huge issue. It probably does bother the bees but not to the extent that pesticides do. Farm ers are in it for the money. They are in it for the money. I'm not bashing that, but it does mean that your honey can sometimes be laced with it if it was particularly close, and sometimes, it can damage your hive and your colony. The mono crop as well. In rural environments, you have large fields of individual plants like oilseed rape, lavender, or heather which gives you a very single-flavoured honey. The main downside is limited space. In rural environments, you can have entire fields go nuts. They get used to cows maybe once a couple of months, or you can stick them at the edge of fields. Space is in abundance. In urban environments, it's much, much more difficult. And public nuisance. You have to be quite careful where you put your bees. Generally, they won't bother anything, but as soon as someone spots a beehive, you will find out they're allergic, even though being allergic to bees is very, very rare. Properly allergic. If you swell when you get stung, that's not an allergic reeks, that's the standard reaction to a bee sting. That's completely normal. For rural, orchards and fields, bountiful crop, and you can get single-flavour honey which you can market as single-flavour honey. I can't remember the exact rules, if you wanted to sell apple blossom honey, in a sample, I can't remember remember how big it has to be, they count the pollen inside it. There is a percentage that it has to hit for it to be counted as apple blossom honey. I think it might be 80 per cent of the pollen must come from an apple tree. In an orchard, that's easy to do. In a city, it's almost impossible. Likewise, so, oilseed rape fields produce a gargantuan amount of honey but the honey is plain-tasting, and it can also crystallise in the comb and be very, very hard to extract. But you get loads of it, so some people love it. Mono crop culture ties into the first one. There are advantages and disadvantages. There is more pesticides which is basically a flat disadvantage. If you go and put your beehives down next to your field and the farmer is sowing crops, and you ask him not to put pesticides on your field be he will laugh at you and tell you to get off his land. The last one which is the main bonus, is there is huge space. Finding space for my apiary in London took me about a year to find somewhere that had a decent amount and the proper access. I will go through that in a second. Beekeeping is not for everyone. There are things that you need to be able to do to be a beekeeper. There are ways to work around them. Don't be allergic to bees is the first one. That's a really bad idea. Even if you carry an EpiPen, I've seen it where people get stung and collapse over into anaphylactic shock. If you're insistent on becoming a beekeeper and allergic to bee stings, there are immunotherapy courses that you can go on. It takes a long time. That might be an option if you're insistent. As a general rule, if you're allergic, don't do it, by your honey from somewhere else. It will be cheaper in the long run, trust me! Requirements are space, time, money, transport, and physical strength. I will go through those now. S this the first thing you need to look at - secure, accessible, safe. - SAS. Beehive theft is a thing, and it's increasingly becoming a thing. When you've invested amount of time and effort you have into your bees, and there's a big colony producing really well, someone comes along and steals them, and it puts you out about a grand. A good strong hive and all of the equipment is worth about £1,000. It's not small business. We have had a big spate of them in Essex where people have driven Land Rovers and Transit van s into the back of people's apiaries in the middle of the night, taken them in 15 minutes. Negative lost 20 hives. That's £20,000. It's quite hard to get insurance for beehives. It's hard to prove you got it stolen. Where you have stuff in a rural environment, it won't be in a fenced-off area. In an urban environment, it's easier to fence it off. Secure, generally. Have a great big fence, or be in an area with a big fence. Allotments are generally fenced off. Make sure the gate is locked. Make sure people can't drive a van up to your apiary site and steal all your bees at once. You don't want people to stumble across them. Vandals are a thing. I have had hives knocked over. Other people have had hives knocked over. Bored kids will come along and kick over. They will pay for it, but get stung to bits. You still have a hive on the floor for the next week because you don't know it's been kicked over. Accessible is another one, so, there are two main things here. It has to be comfortable to access with the vehicle because you will need to get a vehicle there, whether that is a vehicle nearby, or you have access to transport, or you can at least sort something out. The second one is you need to be able to access it 24/. So the day that you've allotted for beekeeping that week, it may be pouring down with rain. You can't inspect a hive when pouring  pouring with rain. If you need to move a beehive, you have to do it in the middle of the night. So, all the bees come - you don't want to move a beehive when a load of bees are out flying and doing things, and they come back in at night, so they come back in, you seal them off, carry them off at 3 Al, plonk them down where you want to be again, remove the hive, and they're good to go. It does have to be at night. The last one is safe. Safe is the most important one, and there are three kind of safes you need. It needs to be safe for you, operating and doing stuff with your bees. It needs to be safe for the bees, and it needs to be safe for the general public. This is the biggest - you can find sites that are secure and accessible. Finding sites that are safe is hard. A bad example of a safe site would be a flat roof that you need to use a ladder to get on to. When you're wearing these bee suits, your peripheral vision is very, very poor. It is very easy just to back yourselves off and take a tumble. If you're going to put bees on a flat roof, make sure there is a safety barrier around, or the roof of a building, make sure there's a safety barrier, or suitably far from the edge. Safe for bees is less of a concern, because bees will generally look after themselves. Safe for the general public is make sure bees aren't going to be flying into people's windows. Make sure the - so each hive has an entrance, and from that entrance, the bees will fly out and up like an aeroplane taken  taking off. That's the flight path. Make sure it's clear, or obstructed in a way where it won't have bees flying straight into people, flying straight into public walkways and windows, because then you will have problems. Good sites: allotments are very good. They're friendly to have bees on site. I have had a couple of of noes from people, but generally very good. Communal garden sites as long as they are fenced in, and the gate is locked. Also good. Rooftops, so business rooftops, businesses in urban environments are really catching on to this at the moment, and, generally, you can get 24-hour access off them. You don't need to have late-night access all that often, but you do need to have it. And that's it. So, this is the biggest commitment is your personal time. There are busy periods of beekeeping, and there are quiet periods. The spring is the busiest period by far. You need to be inspecting your bees, doing a full colony inspection at least once a week. If you don't, your bees will swarm which is how beehives multiply. They bring on a new Queen, and the old Queen, as well as half of the bees will fly off and stick themselves New Zealand a tree and find themselves assess new home somewhere. There are two reasons why this is a problem. One, they will find a home any where: people's chimneys, anywhere that's dark, big, and has access good enough. If we've got time, I will show you fantastic bonus content of what it's like to remove a beehive from one of those locations. It is your responsibility as a beekeeper to make sure that you husbandry your bees properly. Summer, you're spill busy, making sure they've got enough space, you're checking for diseases, checking for diseases in the spring, but in the summer, it's more prevalent. You're still watching for signs of swarming, so, that's kind of once a week, but if you skip a week, it's not the end of the world. Autumn is stuff when stuff starts to wind down. So, you can do it once a fortnight. Or, around about - you can still do once a week if you want to, but there's no huge need. You want to check that they are - they have enough stores and bits and bobs. I will go through that later. It is time, and this is whole days, by the way, or at least half days, depending on the amount of hives that you have. I have six hives. It takes me one whole day to do the bee stuff I want to do properly. If you have two hives, it may take you a long morning, and so on. In the winter, you don't need to such them. You can box them up in October when it starts to get cold. They don't hibernate per se but they will stay in the hive for the whole of winter, and keep themselves warm, and wait there until the spring arrives. Maybe check them once on a bright sunny day mid-winter by opening the top to see if they're still alive. Other than that, just leave them. Then it comes round to the spring again, and you're busy again. Beekeeping is not cheap. It's not a cheap hobby to start. Once you've started, there are also ongoing costs, but - when you start, you always want to start with two beehives. The reason for that is if one beehive goes wrong, you can merge the two behaves together to make one big strong hive, or you can take components of the good hive and use it to fix the other hive. Having two hives is really good. If you only have one hive and it goes bad, it's dead. There's nothing you can do about it. Goodbye bees. Two beehives is the way to go. You need your hive equipment which I have here. It's not overly expensive. You need a bee smoker that smokes bees. The liquid smoke that certain companies sell is not particularly fantastic. The idea of the smoke is that it blocks pheromones like attack pheromones because bees are all about the smell and it calms down down heavily. People have it upsets the bees. It does, but having upset bees is a lot better than you being stun ten or 20 times when of you accidentally dropped a frame, and they're all angry now. So it's very important. Tools come in many different types. A hive tool. I have two or three of them. This is pretty much the kind of standard thing. This how you manipulate the hive. You find one which you like and works for the way you want to be beekeeping. There are other tools like V brushes and gloves. Other equipment. I'm wearing standard neoprene gloves. Bees can sting through this. I have really thick and really tough lamb skin gloves. Bees can sting through them as well. There's no defence. They are a sharp stinger. Having the better manipulation and the mobility and the dexterity of thin gloves is much better than having these thick gloves. There is also other advantages which I will probably explain in the Q&A because it doesn't cover too much. You will need to buy hive equipment, so there are a couple of - just to go over hives briefly. There are two main camps of hive: your wooden hives and your polystyrene hives. As a personal thing, I prefer polystyrene. Wooden hives are fine too. Polystyrene comb preassembled, and they have better insulating qualities, and they're lighter. Wooden hives look nicer, you can stain them whatever colour you want, and they are a bit more traditional. Find out what works for you. There's no right way to do it. Your hive equipment, you will need a full hive, so a floor, a brood box, of which there are a couple of different types. Queen-excluders. The frames to go inside the brood box, and then honey soupers which is where the bees put the honey. You will need spare equipment. It's useful to have stuff on hand. Over-wintered hives: when you get your first hives, I suggest very, very heavily you buy over-winter ed nukes from a local reputable supplier. There are a couple of companies out there that breed bees - they're great - and there are a couple of companies that catch swarms. When you do the over-wintered hive, they will check that they're disease-free, they check they have a good temperament, which is very, very important, and they will just generally make sure that it's a strong colony. If you buy an over-wintered hive, you know they're a strong colony because they've survived the winter. They will come in what is called nukes, half-sized hives for small colonies. It gives you the bees and a nuke which is an incredibly useful thing. Personal equipment, so, beekeeping suit. These range anywhere from £50 to £250. Don't buy anything that is cheaper than £50. You can see them on eBay or stuff. They fall to bits, and they're horrible, and you will end up hating them and replacing them within about two months. Gloves: I very much suggest a hat because it's outside, and it gives a bit of gap, so this hood, bees can sting through it. Getting stung on the top of your head really sucks. You will need a good pair of wellies. Bees can't sting through them. If you're minuting a beehive, one of the frames, and you drop it, it's going to end up on your feet, and you're going to have 400 or 500 bees who are really angry on your feet. So, a good pair of wellies is a must, even if it's really, really hot. So it comes to this a guesstimated figure, depending on where you are, and what you go for, this can go any where south of £1,000, upwards of £2,000-plus. Transport and strength. Beekeeping is physically active. It's physically tiring. If you're moving honey, and you're moving bees around, a full souper of honey doesn't look that big. It weighs 40 pounds, and you're carrying it like this. This is where the choice of space comes in as well. You don't want to carry it quite that far to your car. If you are physically incapable, or ... [Laughter]. Hello? If you're physically incapable, or you have a bad back, again, this might not be the hobby for you. If you have a friend, even better. Moving a full strong colony of bees, before winter, when it is full of honey is a two-person job. Don't lift it yourself. That's 80 pounds of bees that you have to outstretch for. You will destroy yourself and might have to buy a second bee suit. Transport: car is ideal. I would not do this hobby without a car or a van, or at least a very, very reliable friend who has a car or a van, or, if the only way to get around this really is if you have a very local apiary. I wouldn't have an apiary in your garden because, unless you have very, very good friends with your neighbours, and they will be there for the remainder of their lives and your life, it is just drama incarnate. Don't take bees on public transport. It's a really bad idea! [Laughter].  So, you've gone through the prerequisites. It's great, I can do this, strong enough, fit enough, got the money, the time and space to invest, got a car, or a friend with a car, fantastic. How do you get started? The first thing you want to do is get trained. This is very important. Investigate local associations, and go on a beginner course. Almost every area in the country has a local beekeeping association. A lot fell are very, very old, run by very, very old people, and they do things in a very, very old way. You might find that infuriating. Unfortunately, you're going to have to live with it because they are the people who do the training. They're all really very lovely people but we don't accept bank transfers and cheques. Who writes cheques nowadays? Sign-ups are usually in August, and they will run through the theoretical stuff over the winter, and they will do a couple of practical sessions to give you a bit of experience in the spring. That's really good. This is the number-one thing that you should do: go on a course. Don't try and prehandle it yourself. It's super, super, super useful. Afters course, don't feel you've invested and paid and now you're not quite sure or your circumstances have changed. Once you've got bees, getting rid of them is surprisingly hard because people won't take beehives from other people because they don't know how they've been raised. You can sell them. It is trickier than it sounds. Sites tend to fluctuate if you don't take them. Join the British Beekeeping Association. Really, really important. Join the local association if you can. A lot of times, that will give you membership to the British Beekeeping Association as well. What that offers you straight off the bat is disease insurance. There are two very horrible diseases that are in this country -- well, there are two very horrible diseases that isn't in this country but we need to be very, very vigilant about. The first one is European Foul Brood, and the second one is American Foul Brood. If you have either of those diseases in your hive, you must report it to the National Bee -- I can't remember what they're called. It is basically a national body in charge of beekeeping, and they send out bee inspectors. If you have EFB in hive, they will tell you to tape up your hive and burn it. That's the only thing you can do - bees' wax, honey, everything inside. Set it on fire. You can't cure EFB or AFB, and to lose one hive is much better than to let it spread. They insure hives. It's part of your membership, unless you go over a specific number of hives, and it gives you money back for any honey or equipment that has been lost. Very handy. All the bees from a reliable local source. If you're in London, Payne Bee Farm is very good. See what bees other people have got and read rue views. Do not go out and get a swarm. Collecting a swarm is slightly more advanced, and you do not start off with a good colony. Last one: you've got a space, your bees on order. Go to your apiary, or whatever space you've cut out, and make it suitable for your ongoing hobby, so whether that is clearing wasteground, building hive stands, making sure access routes are clear, setting up fences to protect the public - anything like that. Oh, and assemble and paint all your equipment. The first spring: you've got your bees, they've given you a phone call. Off you go, grab them, come back. Put them on your site. Put them on the hive stand that you have made. Leave them for three days. Don't be tempted to look inside them, otherwise you could annoy the bees enough that he had will go and find somewhere else. It doesn't happen a whole lot but if you now know them, it does, if you annoy them, it does. If you get a nucleus of hives, it is already to go in a big hive. You just get it in a small one. Inspect weekly been make sure it's good. Check for swarming behaviour. On the first year, decide what you want to do. So you can build up this hive, and then you can split it again and have two hives but no honey, or you can leave it, and focus on honey production, and only have the single hive - it's up to you. The bees may choose for you. You might not get a choice. In summer, inspect weekly. Keep an eye out for late swarms. Keep an eye on disease. In your beekeeping course, they should do a decent section on spotting disease - K wing, chalk brood, and European foul brood, and a couple of others, and harvest some honey if you get some - wooh! First autumn, when you're doing inspections, you want to be seeing less brood and more honey, because they will start infilling to keep their stores up for the winter. If you need to feed they made, feed them. And then you must treat them. There are small parasitic mites that every single hive in the country has. If you have a beehive, it has the mites. They are a vector of the disease. The general health of your health is determined by the number of mites in. Pick out a treatment that works for you. Winter: you've done your last inspection. It's getting chilly. Take bee fondant. Stick it on top of the hive, close them up for winter and leave them. Put a mouse guard on the front. Bees hate mice. They won't get rid of them but they can't stand the smell. Leave them be until next summer. The golden advice to take from this is take anything you hear from anyone with a pinch of salt. There are are 1001 ways to keep bees. There is no correct way, but there are incorrect ways. Find a way that is suitable for you, and, most importantly, enjoy yourself, have fun in what you're doing. It is a really, really pleasant hobby if you get into it. You're outside, in the sun, it's good, you turn your own off. You can just enjoy yourself. It's very, very nice. Thank you very much. [Applause] I'm not going to go to do Q&A here. A lot of the answers can take hours and hours. I'm up at the London Hack space Village. If you want to come up there after this talk, I will answer any questions you have. I will go through a bit bonus content that lasts five minutes, of, as a novice beekeeper, why you should never say yes to removing a beehive colony from someone else's house. A photograph adventure into suffering. My director told me about a beehive in his house. I went to take it out, under his extension roof which is three metres off the ground. We built a scaffold tower and went through with it. There's the hive. We had to take off all the tiles. It was a big hive. Way bigger than we were expecting. This took us ten hours to remove. So we started chopping away. The bees, all in a really awkward situation, and we're all bending over trying to stuff them into hives. There are some more. You can see the bee space, the bees build their comb, apart from each other. The width of two bees back to back. As soon as they start touching, they stopping build the comb. This is is all wild comb. We will take it, we will cut the brood out, put it into a frame, and then put it into a regular hive. So, we cut all the bees out, and we're like this isn't enough bees for this amount of wax and comb. Where the hell are they? There they are! They are in another part of the hive. Bees when they get to this concentration behave like a liquid. I spent three hours hand-scooping them out and tipping them into a hive. You tip them in the front. As long as you've got the Queen in there, it smells like home, so the bees will come in. On the top of the scaffolding, you can see it up there, fixed the roof. I'm chuffed with that. That's my first roof fix. We put a couple of signs around it saying, "Warning, bees!" I left them there for a week. Came back, took the hive, sealed up fully. This is how you transport a hive. You seal everything that could come off that will come off, tape it as much as you can and then strap it down to a supporting base. One week later, it goes into my apiary with my other bees. They were saved and not poisoned! Thank you very much! [Applause]. That's it. If you want to come up to the London Hackspace Village, come outside here and catch before I run up there, that's cool too. I have honey available for sale as well. It's very local - except not to here! 