Why volunteers are unsung heroes of science by Charvy Narain
>> ... I found a lab, I found a lab which did brain imaging studies, and, these particular labs thing was pain, as in that's what they studied. They had had a pain device, and it turned out the pain device was borrowed from the astrophysics department. It makes sense, I promise you. So it turned out the astrophysics department invented something called a satellite defroster. When they are out in space, they accumulate a lot of ice, and really, then a satellite comes in back into earth orbit with ice, and things don't go well. You need something which melts off quickly and melts off the ice. That's a satellite defroster. The satellite defroster found its true purpose when it came to our lab. Its true purpose really was to strap on the back of your hand and then heat up really quickly until the person went "Woah!" And that was the pain device. So, we hacked a satellite defroster to make it into a pain device. My particular experiment was on the relationship between pain and anxiety. So, what happens if you're really anxious and something painful happens to you. Does that distract you from the pain? Do you notice it so much? Does it make the pain worse because you're already anxious and fearful all of the time, or no effect whatsoever? This is quite an interesting scientifically important question. It was really hard to get volunteers for this. I basically had like the anti-chat-up line throughout my Masters studies because people would come up to me, "So, what do you do?" "I'm a neuroscientist. Would you like to come to my experiments on pain?" And, an amazing number of people said, "Sure, I will come and do it." It turned out that my random sample for my Masters thesis was basically all men, and one woman who was sort of vaguely interested in me. These are the only people who said yes who said come to my experiment. So I realised I was kind of attempting - I realised I was tempting these people up to my lab which was genuinely on top of the highest hill in town, and genuinely had some quite fabulous electric storms. I worked with a German PhD student who wore rimless glasses. He would come up to you and sort of stand behind you and say, "Was in a good pain?" Kind of completely seriously with no sense of irony. He even wore rimless glasses. All I needed was a PI called Victor Frank en design, and I think who is in academia has a point where they say, if this happens, I'm going to quit academia - if my next paper is not accepted, I'm going to quit. If my next grant doesn't get through, I'm going to leave. My personal threshold was if the next post-doc is called Igor, I'm going to leave! But, of course, this is all a horrible exaggeration, except the German guy really was exactly like that. So to give you a sense of what it was really like, I'm going to show you one of the photos from our lab meetings.  So, that is a photo yes from one of my lab meetings. I'm there on the left. So that was my goth face. It is hard being a goth if you're Asian, by the way. I really wouldn't recommend it. That's a senior post-doc. I have had the paper rejected. I'm, "Don't worry, it will all be okay." But I still didn't have it as bad as some other people in the lab. There was a separate group of people who were looking at pain but not just pain felt on your skin, but stomach pain. So, again, this is interesting. Scientifically important. So stomach pain works in quite different ways. It has different recenters. It seems to process differently in the brain, so they needed their own pain device. So, does anyone in this audience have any ideas on how you might simulate stomach pain? This is your chance to get your own funding going. Any idea at all? How do you get to simulate stomach pain in a scientific setting? Any ideas? A friend of mine - 
>> Bad food.
>> Bad food. Interesting. Punching someone in the stomach. I have to say, it would be points for getting into the spirit of things there! The thing with function al image ing - it's not a bad idea but ethically a dubious idea, but what you want to do in functional neuroimaging is you want to take a snapshot of the brain in a particular state. You want to take a snapshot of the brain in particular pain. The brain isn't ever just doing one thing like taking pain. You want to take a snapshot of the brain feeling pain versus when it's not feeling pain. You want to hurt someone at the touch of a button, basically. You want to be able to deliver it on and off. Punching someone, and poisoning them, food poisoning them has rather long-term effects. I also don't think it will get past the ethics committee. So the way to simulate stomach pain is an anal balloon. What you do is you insert the balloon in the anus, and then you inflate really gently and slowly. You have toing very slow until the person goes "ow!". And then you stop. That is genuinely it works very well and you factor it's completely safe, once it's gone, it's gone, except the terrible memories, but the stomach pain group had a really hard time getting anyone to do the experiments. So they had to do it on each other for the most part. Some of them were going out, some had a bad break-up. Things were complicated. For my part, I switched to another topic for my PhD, interested in how the brain understands language which was easier to find subjects for. I had a subject who I experimented on throughout my PhD and my Masters who stuck by me. I did everything on him. Usually, when someone did experiments for us, as a thank you, we would give them a mug, but after three years, a mug kind of felt like a pointed personal statement. I kind of felt obliged to marry him! He was very happy about this! Do you want to see one of our wedding photos? This is a photo from our wedding. [Laughter]. . So, I was still in my goth phase. We've just exchanged rings there. That's about the point that I found out that my now husband was genuinely a distant relative of Boris Karloff. Despite the clear and present dangers of the genetic heritage, after many years together, we decided to reproduce our genetic child, or have a child, or as we like to call her, "Subject number one". [Laughter]. I'm told when she was born I shouted, "It's alive! It's alive!" I was off my head on gas and air. There's subject number 1 who is actually in the audience today. She's doing a sort of tool-use task that chimpanzees and crows can do. She can't do it. She's trying. She's volunteering herself, not entirely informed consent, but her parents have volunteered her in the name of science. So I'm quite admiring of her but also admiring of the people who did this experiment on her, because children are not good at following instruction s, you can't sort of use the techniques you use in animal experiments, you essentially don't give animals enough food, and then you tempt them with food. You can't really starve kids. So you have to find other ways to do stuff. So how do you actually study cognition in a child? I mean, or even also in a baby. What do you do? It turns out that one of the most successful techniques is from way back in the 1950s, and it works very effectively, and it works under the basis that children like looking at new things, so, when you first show them something new, that's what they tend they look like, they're quite interested, you show it again, if they're less interested. You show it to them again, and they start getting a little bit bored. Then, if you show them something new, they perk up. Boring children is a very valid and good scientific method, because when children stop being bored, they're like, "Aha, I noticed there was something different there." And they tend to look at new and interesting things, things that they find interesting of more. When you do those sort of experiments, you find that children like to look at impossible events, like this one. So trains coming off a table, and not falling, keeping on going. They tend to look at this thing much more. From a young age, from three months on. How does a baby know that's impossible? A baby doesn't know anything. So to answer these sorts of questions, it's actually really useful to be able to see the world the way a baby sees it. And to do this, you know, it's really good to generate your own subjects. So this particular subject, belongs to MIT neuro scientist called ... a proud father, and, when his baby was born, he was, "I want to strap a camera to his head and record everything he sees and crunch that data to see if there are visual categories that emerge." This is a great idea. But he faced as he called it unexpected short-sightedness from spousal quarters. He said, "Are you out of your mind?" "What kind of father are you?" "I'm going to report you to the US version of the social services." But in the end, science actually triumphed. So there is Darius, and, when you do the experiments, you find out that children are really collecting data all the time. They actually are influenced by the statistics of the environment around them, they integrate these statistics and make inferences, and then they sort of test inferences. Children are basically doing this. Like all of the time. They are watching you. All of the time. They're doing this. This will  they really are watching you all of the time. A friend fine claim back from maternity leave, and I asked her what is the thing you're looking forward the most? She said, "I'm really looking forward to having a shit in private, ." How do children get away with that? If anyone else said that to you, you can't accompany me to the loo or watch me while I'm on it. Children get away with it. They don't have things of an thing like privacy of the needs of another person. They get away with it because they are so charming. There is a word for a group of people who are completely, completely charming, also have completely no morals, and entirely self-centred. I mean, so this is my working hypothesis that babies and small children are basically sociopaths - cats as well, by the way. This is a testable hypothesis as far as babies are concern. You can test are babies and small children sociopaths or do they have an innate sense of morality? Subject number 2. Subject number 2 is 18 months, and she's watching a puppet show. She's watching a puppet show a lot of times where there's this circle trying to make its way up this hill. Sometimes, this triangle comes along and pushes it up the hill again and again. Sometimes, there's a blue rectangle which comes and knocks the circle down. I mean, as far as morality goes, it is a pretty blunt triangle good, rectangle bad, and she watches this lots of times within and then she's offered a choice. She's offered these two actual puppets on the tray in front of her and asked to pick one. Can I ask everyone in this audience with a show of hand what is going to happen next? Option 1 - she's 18 months, she's not full instructions, she's going to try to eat her own foot - who thinks that is what it going to happen? Not a single person. This is such an optimistic audience, and there is so much frustration going to come in your future when you have children! Option two, she is going to pick the evil rectangle? A few realists, not pessimists, realists in the audience. How many did you think she's going to pick the good rectangle? She's not been offered any inducements. A few people think that's what's going to happen. That is indeed what happens. So, in this particular experiment, this is what they found: children just innately tend to favour an agent which is acting in a pro social way. This doesn't always replicate. There are other situations where it seems that children tend to suck up to powerful individuals, so their morality seems to be flexible and depend on the situation. It is almost as if they are people. It is reassuring when your own child, for example, does this. So, I mean, her mother's Indian, her father's Jewish. We did not see this coming! [Laughter]. It was a bit of a surprise. But I should clarify that - which is not a clarification I thought I would have to issue. She may or may not have figured out morality but she hasn't figured out pointing, and pointing just one finger and not your whole hand. What she's trying to say there is, "Get me more ice cream." At least that's my story, and I'm sticking to it. But the thing I want to say is that really she's the hero. She volunteered now several times to do scientific studies. Really, there are whole swathes of biological sciences or human sciences which wouldn't be possible with someone not going saying, "I will have a former satellite defroster strapped to the back of my hand." "Sure, I will wear prison goggles that make everything upside-down, so I see everything reversed for two weeks. I will try that." So, really, what I want to finish with is a big round of applause for all people who were in experiments, and all of the volunteers who have made this particular festival possible which I'm told is entirely volunteer-run. Thank you very much. [Applause]. 