      Lightning Talks 
      
      [Breakwaiting for lightning talks]
      >> On the slides.  Hello, and welcome to lightning talks.  We're going to start as soon as we can see the slides in the room. 
      >> Well, we got black.  Hey!  There we go.  Okay.  No.  It's a trap. 
      
      [discussion of logistics] 
      Okay.  So, that's apparently the best we're going to do.  Hello and welcome to the Friday lightning talk session.  So good to see such a large audience.  We're a bit behind, we will struggle to fit everyone in.  For the lightning talks, each speaker has ten minutes.  I'll set a ten minute timer on this thing.  And when the ten minutes is done, we'll interrupt with a large round of applause.  If we could do the round of applause.
      [ Applause ]
      Okay.  That seems to work.  First up is Una talking about Van Eck.
      >> Thank you.  Hi, my name is Una.  And I like signals.  I thought up this lightning talk idea literally on the plane here from Helsinki.  So, it's a lightning talk in many senses.  It's about Van Eck phreaking.  It's Eve dropping a signal that's not supposed to be sent.  It's from electric devices like electromagnetic radiations via radio.  And it's named after this Van Eck who published a paper in '85.  But he knows this phenomenon in CRT, this ray tube displace.  They can't listen with the radio at the distance, and you can copy the image and view it yourself at the distance.  So, they are not secure at all.  Now, some explaining needed.
      This is an image of my antenna that I call the hacksaw.  I use it to listen to 446 megahertz radios.  Actually I spent my summer holiday doing that.  But started noticing a strong interference just below 446 megahertz at 445.49.  And I was thinking, what could it be.  I could only hear it in my home.
      So, I started investigating it.  And it sounded like a video signal.  Now, when I told my friend that it sounded like a video signal, he was pretty confused because how can anything sound like video?  But when I was a child I used to hook up my Nintendo the wrong way so that the video signal was actually by mistake fed into the audio channels.  So, it made this very peculiar noise and I recognized that noise.  This must be video.  I was actually hearing the 60 hertz vertical synchronization pulse there.
      Now, the frequency was very odd.  445.  Why would it be 445?  And then I noticed, if you calculate the pixel clock frequency of this particular very weird display mode, you get  once multiplied by 3, you get 445.490.  So, I was thinking it could definitely be a display.  But how can I hear a display on the radio?  And shouldn't this only be applicable to CRTs?  Which are analog.  And I'm pretty sure nobody is using a CRT display in my home.
      So, I wrote the little program using C++ and open CV.  I call it Jempest, named after Tempest which I believe is a military term.  Related in some way to these kind of emanations.  This is a screenshot of the same program and I'm receiving an image of the Google home page on my HDMI display which is situated just 2 meters from my computer.  And I'm doing it with this small radio.  This is about the size of a match box.  It's called airs by R2, and a small antenna.
      Just to describe the image, it's black and white.  And there is a lot of interference, but you can definitely see the Google logo and some browser user interface elements there.
      This is the result of integration from many consequence images.  I don't get the video feed where every frame is this clear, but most pictures on an HDMI display are very static anyway.  So, I can integrate seconds of time and get a pretty clear image.
      But the mapping from color to the signal level that I'm receiving is still a bit of a mystery.  Here I have four gradients of color and grayscale.  And below are the same gradients received at my radio.  So, it's not a onetoone correspondence.  The receive pattern is sort of a strife pattern.  So, I still have a lot of things to do with this.  But I'm hopeful that it will someday give me a clearer image.  What I could do, I could  I've heard it can be set to a higher bandwidth mode with a custom firmware.  But I haven't done it yet.  Or maybe I could just use a higher bandwidth radio.  And the USB bandwidth will probably be a limiting factor at some point.
      Now, I had the video link, but I'm not going to try it out on this because it's not my laptop and I don't have his okay.  I got the go ahead there.  So, I don't even know how many seconds I have left.  Yes, hello.  So, anyway.  That's a video which shows basically the same thing that was  that I was talking about.  As my radio, and just me looking at the spectrum on a spectrum analyzer.  And here's my display, about a meter away from my laptop where I view the image on this program that I showed earlier.  And when I scroll the page, it's pretty realtime.  And it has some neat hackery statistics on the righthand side as well.  And I need to improve those.
      Then I also show that I can receive the image even if the display is in an adjacent room by using a slightly bigger antenna.  Actually, it's the same antenna used in the beginning.  But this is not something you can do sneakily.  It's about 80 centimeters wrong and has many spikey elements coming out of it.  But I can still receive the image if I wait long enough.  And here the text is pretty clearly visible.
      And we can also see the long indication time, it blurs the tech, but it also removes any timerelated noise from the image.  The signal speed is about 10 million samples per second.  Okay.  Let's not use the next video.  Thank you.  That was my lightning talk.
      [ Applause ]
      >> Navigation  thank you.  Now they're both on.  Yep, sure.  Here you go.  Can I what?  Sorry?  I can blank it.  There.  No slides, then.  No. 
      >> Hi.  Is this on? 
      >> One second.  Well, we'll swap. 
      >> La!  There.
      >> Ready to start?
      >> Yes.  Can that light be turned off?
      >> I'll work on it.
      >> Okay.  Hi.  My name is Cy.  I am partially blind.  Namely I am super light sensitive.  So, I can't see anything if I'm facing this way because that light is way too bright for me.  If I were facing the other way, I would be able to see just fine.  I'm teaching some workshops on blind navigation as well as a talk you can come to today at 4:15 by the trees in the center area.  Now I'm going to teach you how to be an asshole to blind people.  With TQ, my assistant as the example person.
      Now, we all know that as kids, we learn object permanence, right?  So, TQ, could you please pick up the bottle that you put down on the other chair?  Yeah.  So, please don't move my stuff.  If I put it down in a given location  can you pick it up?  There you go.  So, that's step one.  Step two.
      Consent is important, right?  So, TQ, stand up.  And let's pretend that the edge of the stage is a curb that you're walking up to.  And so, we're just standing here waiting for the light.  And TQ probably has his hand on the little nub that shows when something is about to change and it's safe to walk.  And I come up and say, oh, blind person.  Let me pull you in the right direction.  Now, TQ, can you point in the direction that we were facing, the back of the tent.
      >> We were facing this direction.
      >> Good.  However, if you do this and you don't know which way I'm going, or frankly, you don't have my consent, don't.  Instead, there are a couple ways you can approach someone.  Hi.  Would you like directions?  That's one way.  If you want them to know where you are, you can use the back of your hand, not the front, because that's grabby  back.  On arm and just say, hi.  Would you like directions?  Next.  Hint.
      Blind people are blind.  People don't always realize this.  So, for example, let's say, TQ, you're asking me how to get to the pedestrian entrance of EMF.  I say, oh.  Well, you just go that way.  Head straight and you'll  it'll be right next to the white tent.  That tells you nothing.  If instead I say, oh, so, you go out of this tent, you shoreline right.  There is  that tent entrance is on the right.  Turn right at that.  You'll hit  go straight, you'll hit the paving.  Turn right on the paving.  Turn left when you can on more paving.  And walk along that path until you reach the pedestrian entrance.  That is something that TQ actually probably can do and I've only trained him for like one hour.
      >> If you don't know the term "Shorelining," just say," Follow the path."
      >> Yes, shorelining is a simple technique which actually we can demonstrate with the edge of the stage.  Walk along the edge of the stage and don't walk off of it.  So, to follow an edge, and follow parallel, is just 
      >> Too much stuff on the stage.
      >> Yeah.  Then we run into the wires.
      >> Yeah.
      >> Is a matter of following a line.  So, if you expect someone to cross across an open area, things aren't going to go well unless they're following you directly.  If you want someone to follow you directly, the bad way to do it is this.  Hey, TQ, follow me.
      Yeah.  So, if I can't hear you, I can't follow you.  A better way to do it is to say, "Hey, TQ, follow me."
      Nice and audible.  And all I'm doing this is just scuffing my feet.  Another way is if you want to lead someone  sorry?  Yes.  If you want to lead someone, bad way.  Grab and we're going to go this way.  This is also known as a come along hold for police.  Not a good thing to remind people of.  Instead, offer your hand say, "Would you like to follow me?" And then they can hold you on the hand or the shoulder or the elbow and then you just walk wherever it is.  And it's fine.  That way they're in control of when they're holding you or not.  Not you.  And it doesn't feel like it's being grabbed.
      Another thing.  TQ, walk straight towards me.
      >> Okay.
      >> With  with a full sweep.  So, don't do this.  Don't cross along the line.  You can tell, you know  blind person coming towards you, they're sweeping their cane.  You can see me coming.  I can't see you, necessarily, unless you're really loud.  If you walk across the line of my cane, you're going to get tangled up on it and I'm going to get disoriented and you're probably going to trip.  Don't do that.  If you're following next to a blind person, so, we're walking together, don't walk in front because you're going to be in the way of the cane sweep.  And don't walk between them and a wall or in this case the chairs, because those are used as a reference.
      Instead, walk slightly behind them.  And to the side.  So, this way I can follow TQ if he continues walking and there's not really a problem.  And, yes, I have my eyes closed, I can't see shit.  But  yeah.  So, that's another  what other things have people done to me in the last week?  Don't grab the cane?  So, if you're trying to tidy things up or something and TQ puts his cane down and I grab it and, you know, put it somewhere else and he goes to reach for wherever it was, not a good idea.
      How would you like it if I grabbed your eyeballs?  That's not an understatement, unfortunately.  Also, please don't grab me by the eyeballs and like point them unless I specifically request you to do that.  Do not do this.  Do not grab this.  Because I am  while talking to you, I'm also monitoring, for example, the existence of this cable so that I don't trip on it.  And how far I am.  And whether there is ground movement from cars and things like that.  And also this is an extension of me.  It is my eyes.  If you grab this and move it, you are grabbing me by the eyeballs and I'm going to be really, really resisting putting you on the ground.  So far I've not had to do that.
      Please don't.  So, if you would like to learn how to actually navigate with a cane, I'm giving a workshop and a talk.  Please come.  There's information on the schedule or at SDAI/EMF.  It's not all about the cane.  It's a lot about sound.  Not as much as you might think and more than you might think.  So, for instance  [cane tap]  that tap is enough for me to know the contour of the room, how tall it is, and roughly where the door is.  If you don't know why, come learn.  Psalm thing for wind.  You can feel a wall that you're next to.  You can smell things, you can tell which orientation a corridor is.
      It's a lot of senses beyond your eyes and we use all of them.  So, thank you very much.
      [ Applause ]
      >> Next, please.  Awesome.
      >> Hello, everybody.  I'm a sociologist.  And I spent nearly 20 years now gaining my abilities to observe and to interview people in the hackers communities.  But today I'm not going to talk about hacker culture.  I'm going to talk about parkrun.  How many have heard about parkrun?  Quite a few of you.  How many of you are going to run tomorrow?  No?  Okay.  But, hopefully today's story is going to inspire you to go to the parkrun  go to a parkrun tomorrow and then just to see the parkrun from a different point of view.  And the talk is going to be based on my sociology insight.  It's not sponsored by parkrun.  And I put this very quickly together last night while my little one was sleeping.  So, I do apologize if it's not the best slides you've ever seen.  For those who haven't heard of parkrun, it's a free weekly 5K timed run open to everyone above 4 years old.  And it's usually quite safe and then there is lots of volunteers and the first aiders.  Not first aiders necessarily on site, but it's relatively safe compared to many other runs.  And it began in the UK in 2004 and it's gained a lot of publicity and popularity as well in the past years.
      But there is like you either like it or hate it.  And there are a lot of interesting decease on parkrun.  For instance, there's one funded by cancer research UK in 2014 and they're looking to why parkrun is so successful for changing people's lifestyles and changing people's behaviors.  But these are  these researches are done by people in the Department of Health and they're looking for community participation and prevention.  They conclude that parkrun creates active and inclusive physical culture.  And then parkrun's approach can help a crosssection of participants from diverse social backgrounds as well as people who didn't previously identify as runners.
      They did a survey and interview with people.  And so, basically, to identify those key features for their success.  But as a sociologist, I like to kind of make things more complicated.  So, I use this concept called infrastructuring.  And turning the infrastructure as a verb.  And to understand how parkrun became infrastructured.  Became more institutionalized.  Most of my research is based on the concept developed by Susan and Karen Ryder in 1996, quite long ago.  And they have distributed information infrastructure.  So, they analyze the labels of infrastructure complicity involved and designed used communication and looking to how things work.  In 2007 in the United States and elsewhere in Europe, and there's a growing interest and understanding largescale cyber infrastructure.  Again, people are looking to the history of and theory of infrastructure.
      So, my kind of background is from my interest based on this kind of intellectual discussion.  And now I'm going to summarize and share with you and the seven things I've observed about the success of parkrun.  Number one, it's usually got the standard format.  It's very predictable.  Every Saturday, 9 a.m. start usually.  And there's some variation in some local areas.  Scotland and Ireland or some other countries or locations.
      And we use this standard format.  It's easy to set up and, for instance, there is bar codes in the tokens so you can receive.  And then there's also standard signage.  It's very well signposted.  And, for instance, so even the run directors, they are given this page and based on the same script.  They might be somewhat different, depends on people's performance skills, but most of the time they are saying to the people, to the runners the same thing every Saturday.  Second point, if you want to start a parkrun, you are offered a budget of up to 3,000 pounds.  And so, that is quite handy.  So, you know, you are not left without anything and so you have a means.
      Number three, digital technologies really help over here.  So, there's a parkrun website, for instance, and a recorded time.  It's a database of all the runners and all the time, all the activities, including volunteers and there's  mobile phone apps for scanning.  And there's also mobile phone apps for timing.  So, you don't fully rely on the timer anymore.  So, lots of things can be automated and save time.
      But even so, there's lots of volunteers involved.  And we have to thank the volunteers and marshal, the organizing making sure everything runs.  And also the community is supportive by lots of entertaining things such as podcasts and there are a lot of different series including free weekly timed parkrun adventures, the parkrun show, or with me now.  And there's also some related talk such as marathon talk.  And these are some photographs that I've taken.  These are the run director.  They are putting the time into the database.  And so, the runners can receive their time.  It's actually quite laborious.  And so, no doubt that it's a hard job.  And then also volunteers in the rain and trying to marshal runners.  So, the community is a huge thing behind.
      And over here, I just had to highlight different kinds of volunteers.  So, for instance, over here the volunteer is a safe volunteer.  They do the sign language for the runners.  If you can't hear the run director talking, then you can see the sign language.  So, it's quite interesting.  I've seen it in two different parkruns now.  One in Edinburgh.  And this one is near Sterling.  And number five, you have support from proper authorities.  It's got recognition from the proper authorities like the local councils allow the runners to use the park.  Or nurses and GPs prescribe patients to do the parkrun.
      So, that helps as well.  And then branding is a big thing.  So, for instance, parkrun has got these very pretty logos and it was a different  it looked different before and then they've just recently kind of rebranded themselves.  And so, the token, for instance, looks different now.  The sponsorship is increasing, for instance.  Fitbit, a lot of other sport equipment, they also sponsor parkrun.  And over here is a local parkrun in Scotland being sponsored by Victoria Harris.  So, different parkruns might get different sponsorships and the last thing I think is very crucial is because it's free!  And then people don't have to pay to do a marathon or to do a 5K every week.  So, that's a reason why it's relatively attractive to a lot of people.
      So, however, from the sociology perspective, sociologists like to make things complicated.  We like to look into controversies.  For instance, there's lots of issues that we don't usually pay attention to including, for instance, what stopped people from attending.  It could be people might have their caring responsibility.  That, for instance, I have to find someone to mind my children otherwise I won't be able to do a parkrun every Saturday morning.  And there's also people if you are disabled or blind, for instance, and how do you take part in  if this is really good for your health and how do we encourage more people to take part?  How do we encourage more people to become this community?  What do we mean by community anyway?  And so, it's quite interesting to look into for sociologists to look into kind of different localized practices.  For instance, how the tokens were received in different parkruns as different communities have different arrangements.  So, for sociologists, this kind of helped me to understand.  It's very interesting.  And it helped to move beyond the symmetry and neutrality of parkrun so we can proselytize a parkrun.  So, my time is nearly up.  I would just like to say that tomorrow morning there will be a few people going to this  maybe my pronunciation is not right  this parkrun.  And people are going to leave the EMF campsite around 8:00.  And there's a weekly page about the parkrun tomorrow.  And it's like  and you don't have to run it, you can walk the 5K as well.  There will be the tail walker in every run.  And then you don't have to worry that you won't be the last one because there will be the tail walker who will be walking with you or behind you.  But if you don't try, you won't know if this is something you would like or hate.
      So, I would kind of encourage you to come to the parkrun tomorrow.  Thank you very much.
      [ Applause ]
      >> Thank you, that was a feeble clap.  So, our last lightning talk should be Dan Williams.  Cool.  I have your slides.
      >> Hi, everyone, I'm Dan.  And this talk is essentially a slide show of photos from a recent holiday of mine.  A while back I became interested in radio quiet zones.  And I became quite fascinated with them.  And there were these places, geographical spaces, because there's something special in that place, they don't want any man made radio signals there.  There's a few around the world.  Some for military monitoring purposes, there's some in China, South Africa and Australia.  The most famous is this one, the US radio quiet zone.  It's 100 miles by 100 miles square in West Virginia in the Allegheny mountains.  And you're not allowed to use FM radio, TV signals, WiFi, mobile phones, any kind of artificial radio signal is forbidden.  And this zone exists for two different facilities.  There is a military base and there's a radio telescope.  And in this space the kind of priorities of how we use radio is different.  Normally we prioritize like people communicating.  In this case, there's a different priority.  So when I got interested in radio quiet zones, I did what I do.  I set up a Google alert.  And I found that there's like three main things that people write about radio quiet zones.  There's like academic papers with like research results which I have no idea what they're on about.  This is the second type, which is the results from people searching for alien life because they used to use these radio telescopes and the third kind, which is every six months a mainstream publication like say the Washington Post or the BBC go to the US national radio quiet zone.  Never one of the other ones, always this one.  And they can write basically the exact same story every time.  They write how this place is trapped in the 1950s.  That you can't text your friends.  You have to use land lines and post, you can't turn on the TV.  And as well as profile what life's like there for normal people.  They always profile the people who come there because they are allergic to WiFi or phone signals.
      Yeah.  And it can follow the same template.  And I thought, this place looks fascinating.  I want to go back to 1950s pretechnology America.  I wanted to go on a road trip, luckily I had two friends heading there, they were doing a video for YouTube.  I was tagging along.  It was an eerie place.  We drove the hundred miles into the square.  And there are only the two sites, the military base which has shut down and now for sale.  If you can convince the estate agent you're in the market, you can visit it on an open day.  Unfortunately couldn't do that.  But went to green bank, the home of the radio telescope.  It's the Robert C Byrd telescope.  It's named after the former Senator of the state, I believe, who was really good at getting government funding for stuff.  So, everyone's a big fan of him.
      And it's massive.  Like I'm not sure I can convey how big it is.  Like, there are other radio telescopes on the site.  This one dwarfs over them as you climb up it.  It's kind of got a weird pixelated vibe.  It's made up of hundreds of panels that are individually steerable to finetune the signal.  This is how big the nuts and bolts it's made of are.  As well as being quite enormous, it's incredibly sensitive.  When you get near it, there's a buffer zone where you can't enter without permission.  They don't allow petrol vehicles near it because the spark plugs in the engine create too much interference.  It's so sensitive that this poster which looks like it's made of mat lab next to the telescope warns you that even turning on a digital camera next to it can be picked up by the telescope in their results.  They have a special van, the radio finding van.  This is the van they drive around the zone filled with radio receiving equipment so they can track down any interfering signal.  If you have a WiFi router in the zone, they will find you.
      But largely most of the interference doesn't come from other people in the zone.  It comes from the facility itself.  As one of the staff members told us, they are their own worst enemy.  The actual instruments on the telescope cause interference.  They have a team of people in a chamber and they take the scientific instruments that the researchers sent to them and they'll build special boxes for them that won't cause interference.  And the campus itself doesn't really have scientists, physicists, people doing research.  It's mainly like an engineering facility.  It's people fixing the telescope, building the telescope, writing the software to control the telescope.  It's basically like any engineering department in university.  There's like workshops and labs and lots of academic papers stapled to the wall.
      And as you walk around the facility, you can't really feel any different from like if you're in a nonradio quiet zone.  It's pretty much the same.  Apart from the weird traces you bump into.  In the canteen, the microwave has a beefy metal box so it doesn't cause interference.  They Earth their tool boxes.  There's landline phones and phone books everywhere.
      At one point walking around the office building, there was an announcement, saying Mike, Mike, please contact the front desk immediately.  And someone leans out their office and goes, "Mike!  What have you broken this time!" there was someone we were trying to meet up with.  Are they going to meet me at 3:00?  I have to go back to the office to check the email.  Rather than on the phone.  But throughout the day, it slowly appeared that this kind of complete ban on radio was a slight exaggeration in the stories that we'd read.  Like, when we crossed into the zone, there wasn't like a zone telling you, turn everything off now.  It was like a multilane highway.  We stopped at like a McDonald's that had free WiFi inside the zone.  There are entire towns and cities in there.  And it's not even like a hard place to get to.  It's got like a visitors center and a gift shop and like a viewing deck.  So, it's kind of not quite as I had imagined it in my head.  I even took like an SDR radio and plugged it in next to the telescope and listened to what was there and you could see emissions from people's mobile phones.  People hadn't switched their phones off there which made me realize that I had left my Fitbit on and used the wireless fob to close the car door.  And chatting in the control room at the end of the day, staff members were telling us about the different wireless things they had at home but shouldn't, but everyone does, so who cares, sort of thing.
      One of them mentioned, it's not like a forbidden zone, it's a carefully managed and regulated space.  But that's a less catchy headline for a newspaper.  Or as the sign on someone's office door said, radio frequency management is done by experts who meld years of experience with the purest  politics and not a little bit of larceny.  They horse trade, bluff and gamble with an intuition that can be taught by long experience.  Which, I'll be honest, makes me love the place much more than just a total outright ban.  I love that they've managed to still make a balance where you can live a normal life, yet prioritize radio research.  Thank you.
      [ Applause ]
      >> Okay.  Thank you, everyone.  That was the final lightning talk for today.  There's still space on Sunday if somebody has become inspired.  And just finally, could we thank all of the speakers just once again.
      [ Applause ]
      [Break]

