
>> What happened there? Mark had a load of church organ bits and we had a shared interest in making wacky contraptions. Our plan was to make something that would enable us to get into festivals without paying. Our first concept was a giant phallic sculpture made of spanners, spurting flames. Which we still might build at some point, but we decided to go with something that had slightly broader appeal. But before I get into that, a little bit about us.

>> Hi. I'm Mark. I've always been into radio and electronics and stuff, and fortunately for this project I did work for a while as an organ builder. On actual pipe organs. But then I trained as an English teacher, ended up working back in technology again, which is where I've stayed, really, and worked on everything from being a corporate sound engineer to designing military intercoms.

>> I started out my work in life as a mortgage advisor, and that didn't really work out for me, so I became a beer smuggler, I ran a sound system, I joined a circus for a while, and I eventually ended up as a blacksmith.

>> So as for the organ parts, when I was a teenager, growing up in Bristol, I got given a medium-sized church organ from a church that was modernizing, and as a teenager, I thought it would be a really cool thing to own. My parents had a big garage so it went into storage for 30 years.

>> I thought it would be fun to do something with this organ that Mark had, and we documented our journey of trying to make the thing work and share it on YouTube. The first thing that we wanted to do was to make a trolley. Something we could push around like a mobile exhibit we could take around festivals. Then I said to Mark let's think a bit bigger. We'll put it on one of my trailers. And then a few beers, I said: Let's put it on the Zil. I was gonna go into an explanation about what Zils are, but there's one around the corner. You can see on the screen they're military from the peak of the Soviet Union. Beautiful vehicles. They have a huge V8 petrol engine, which is really, firstly, unreliable, and in my case, completely lacking a starter motor.

>> This video from day one gives a bit of history of Max's Zil, if we can have found on it.

>> It's a fascinating bit of Cold War history in itself. Unfortunately I've left it neglected for some time. Let's have a look. There she is. This is a Zil 131. Although you can't tell at the moment, it's a six wheel drive troop carrier. Well, general purpose vehicle from the Soviet Union. And this particular one was made in 1975, which makes it as old as I am.

>> So... That's how it was. It was sat in a hedge. It had been there for about 10 years. The thing is, once you buy a Zil, there's not an awful lot you can do with it. So I didn't, in the end. So this was my big chance to get it running. It had been there for a long time. Hadn't started for a long time. The starter motor -- I think it was about 15 years since the starter motor fell to bits. The hedge had kind of incorporated itself very much into the truck. Mark was quite dubious that we could even get the thing running, let alone leave the hedge.

>> I think it was fair that I was dubious to a degree, because it was stuck in a hedge. And in reverse, with a seized clutch. With flat tires. It hadn't been started for years. Didn't even have a starter motor. It didn't have a working fuel system.

>> No fuel pump.

>> Anyway, we'll take a look at the next stage, I think.

>> So I set about... Just trying to find the starting handle, really, to begin with. Don't worry. You're not gonna watch the whole thing of me mowing the hedge.

>> But there's the starting handle.

>> So out into the daylight for the first time in many years. Then what did we do next?

>> Start it?

>> No, we didn't. We opened up the housing, rammed a crowbar into the clutch, and popped it off. So then we could start the thing without it just going backwards into the neighboring field and upsetting my farmer friend. Here we go. First attempt. You're only seeing the highlights.

(motor roaring)

There we go! That was a whole can of petrol in a Stella can down the carburetor to make that happen. So we started it. That's a whole can of fuel gone. We haven't quite pumped up the tires yet.

>> Five liters of fuel to pump up the tires.

>> So it really seemed so unlikely. The idea of hand cranking a V8 engine while hand-pouring the petrol in was strange enough. Having it start was unexpected, so things were looking up, really.

>> This was our second attempt to start it. Mark's birthday last year, almost this time last year, wasn't it? And here's our first ever drive, as Project Awesome.

>> Straight into a wall.

>> That was episode one of our YouTube adventure. Which has done quite well. It's just gone over a million views now. Although most of those are in Indonesia, for some reason. It's gone down a treat in the Far East. So then again you're only seeing the highlights, but a few more attempts. And quite a few more cans of fuel. We managed to get it up the hill towards my workshop. The entire journey took about four months. It's not something you want to crank every day.

>> I like this bit.

>> Yeah, nearly lost the dog at that bit, didn't we?

>> Twice.

>> So now we had a platform to put our project onto. But it was obvious...  Well, even before we attempted to start the thing that the engine had to go.  Now, it turns out it's just as cost effective to buy an entire lorry as it is to buy an engine and gearbox. So I did. This is an ex-British Telecom vehicle. We're quite happy. We've made it back without being arrested and we have a slipping clutch. Triumphant moment. So we've got the engine and gearbox, which was the primary reason for buying it. It also gave us a box which we could put the organ in, that we're going to build. But on the DAF, it's much too big. It would overhang the Zil hugely. So the first thing to do was to mow a meter off of the box to make it more proportionately correct for what we wanted. So what we've got going on here... Yeah. Circular saw. We had Mark on hand with a camera, in case things got exciting.

>> I was hoping they would, actually. Secretly. It was quite a worrying moment when it went right through. I thought the whole thing was just gonna fall off.

>> So that's removing the extra meter from the walls. Then the next bit, which I ended up doing on my own... A few days later... I had to take that front piece and stick it back on to make the new box. This turned out to be quite awkward. On my own.

>> I bet it was easy to drop it.

>> Yeah, quite easy. There we go. And you'll notice when I get it back up, I ram it into the roof a few times and give myself some more work to do, repairing fiberglass later on. But eventually I got there. And as I was saying to Mark earlier, I didn't lose my temper and throw the thing into the hedge, which was great.

>> It would have certainly been easier with two, I think, or three. And a crane.

>> Yeah. There we go. Come on. You can do it! Yeah. Yeah! It was jammed at the bottom. There we go. There we go. There we go! Right. So now we've got a four meter long box, which is just right to go on the Zil. And the next stage is to fill it with organ. Probably most of you are familiar with a church organ, which is something where you see all the pipes. The donor for the first part of our project was a church organ. And we're gonna incorporate that into the project, but we're also gonna add a lot more theater organ parts. Theater organs are something you don't see very much, because they tend to be part of a whole building. More familiar, I guess, would be fairground organs. We've all seen these, and they tend to make a dreadful noise. Well, they do.

>> Everyone who goes to Steam Fairs has had to endure these things. And they're a really loud offensive box of whistles. Which is nice, because we want to be able to do loud and offensive, but the big problem with fairground organs is they're not fully chromatic. You can't play all the notes. And also they tend to have a limited capability of the kind of sounds they can produce. Although they have high pressure pipe work, which makes them loud, they wouldn't quite be able to cover the range of sounds that we would want to do. Also, the important thing about this instrument we're building is that we wanted to be not just playable via MIDI from a computer, but we want to be able to have somebody actually come along and play the thing. So we kind of look more towards cinema organ parts.

And the thing with the cinema organs -- they were designed more to be a kind of one-man orchestra, and also had the sort of sound capability to fill massive auditoriums.

>> So I'll just interject at this point that everyone thinks of... If you're familiar with a cinema organ at all, which probably most of the people here under the age of 80 are not... It's something that you associate with Blackpool and that kind of hideous music. But it wasn't always that way. They were initially designed to accompany silent films, and the cinema organ was designed to replace an entire orchestra, so you can have one guy making all the sounds of an orchestra. What we're gonna try and do is bring that back so that instead of just having a fairground organ playing fairground music or a church organ playing church music or a Wurlitzer playing ballroom music, we want to be able to do everything from really nice church music to really offensive drum and bass.

>> Obviously that would require a few things. Particularly the ability to control it by MIDI. And the people who designed the -- even the electropneumatic pipe organs like the Wurlitzers, the theater organs, back in the 1920s, weren't interesting MIDI more than they were considering nose bleeding drum and bass. I don't know if any of you have in-depth knowledge with how 1920s pipe organs worked. You're gonna leave with a bit more knowledge than you came with. We've got a diagram here. It's a four-stage process. The blue sections -- do they look blue on that screen? That's good. That's excellent. Wind under pressure inside a box. That's what we call a wind chest.

>> I'll just say, Mark, because it's not really clear on here, this relates to one tiny part of one wind chest. So each rank of pipes has a wind chest, and that wind chest is full of what you see here on this picture. And it has to go through this entire process just to play one note.

>> So each pipe on the organ would... Has to have one of these units on. The blue section, as I said, was wind under pressure. And probably not the sort of air pressure that a lot of you are used to. I'm not talking about 150 PSI, the outputs from an air compressor. If you tried running a pipe organ on that kind of pressure, all you're gonna achieve is launching the pipes up through the ceiling. That could...

(laughter)

Oooh!

>> It's a one-off show, though, isn't it? They're expensive pipes.

>> Good finale. But these instruments really did represent some of the earliest and most innovative uses of electropneumatic, electromechanical systems. You have a magnet in the bottom of the chest that when it's actuated opens a tiny, tiny valve, a fraction of a millimeter, unbelievably small. That exhausts a little leather pouch, which in the second bit of the diagram -- the blue bit goes white. Opening a secondary valve that's just a little bit bigger, a secondary stage, which then collapses a bigger pneumatic motor. Which was all wood and leather. This is what they've been made of for centuries. Opening the pipe and allowing the pipe to sound. Although that sounds like quite a complex process, after you've energized that magnet, that all happens in a fraction of a second, because when you play an instrument you need that note to sound straight away. If there's a long delay, it makes it very, very unpleasant to play, sort of, if not impossible.

So we had all the theory, and I had worked on a few electropneumatic systems before, on organs, when I worked in the industry. Though not much. We thought the only real way to get set about this was to build a prototype with a couple of little wind chests.

>> So we had lots of pipes, lots of components, but we didn't have any wind chests. Nothing to sit pipes into, to make all this process happen. So that's what we had to do next, was to actually build a wind chest and try to sit the pipes on it and get some music out of the thing.

>> So I scribbled a picture on the back of a fag packet, sent him to get some plywood, and off he went.

>> I drilled lots of holes in and then cut channels. At the top of the bit of wood there, you'll see the electromagnets and we've got channels going through the wood, and this is upside down, effectively. So if this was the other way up and encased in a box, you would put the pipes on top of it.

>> That was pretty much it. These parts were all robbed from some random scrap bits of pipe organ that I had had lying around, so we were able to salvage enough to just build this prototype in the kitchen. But obviously power is nothing without control, and we had to drive this thing. We wanted it to be MIDI controllable. So I had to build hastily throwing together a control system on VeroBoard, just made up of Darlington drivers and shift registers. Oh, God, we're running out of time. I'm gonna speed this up. So building stuff of that scale on VeroBoard is a little bit tedious. A couple nights of this kind of thing. As there are a lot of computery programming type people on here, I'm gonna quickly try to explain how the MIDI software works. We've got an Arduino, which receives MIDI data via its serial point, and those note on and note off messages on each of the notes is added or subtracted from 128-bit integer, depending on the note on and note off messages. All those bits are shifted from the integer, passed through an IO pin to an array of shift registers. The output of the shift registers are connected to some Darlington arrays, which drive the magnets. It's a relatively simple process. Weirdly, it works quite reliably.

Building it on the VeroBoard took ages. I think for the bigger system, it's gonna get a PCB designed for it.

>> Yeah, quite a few. So like everything we do with this organ, the individual part is quite easy to work out. But then you've got to do it by 100 or 200 or 300 times. To actually get a semblance of a tune out of the thing.

>> So we've got, I think, somewhere like 56 pipes here. We've managed to just chuck onto a couple of experimental wind chests. And we had rigged it up to the control. And what better thing to play for the first thing on a homemade pipe organ than Bach's Toccata and Fugue in D Minor?

(organ playing Bach's Toccata and Fugue in D Minor)

>> We're streaming this over telephone! And at this stage, it's all breadboard and VeroBoard and crocodile clips.

>> So this is completely unregulated air as well. What we haven't told you is about the entire air regulation system that we need to build to control this thing properly. You saw it there running off of a bouncy castle blower and a pair of vacuum cleaner hoses.

>> So right... It's all looking good. We've got an organ that works. I learned how to tune them when I was a kid. So that wasn't too bad. All we needed to do, really, was scale it all up.

>> And we needed to make it AWESOME.

>> Awesomer. So a bigger scale means controlling significantly more pipes. We got 56 pipes there. We needed to upscale it from a few dozen pipes to a few hundred pipes.

>> So Mark was off sailing a yacht and I was keeping an eye on eBay. And I happened to come across an entire four-rank wind chest that was going for next to nothing at the other end of the country. So I rebuilt my trailer, and we set off to... Bradford, wasn't it? Three days it took, to get... The first part of the journey was made in my 1967 Land Rover towing the trailer up to Mark's, and we relayed... Anyway, it was an epic journey. You see here the wind chest upside down. You can probably make out all the tiny little magnets on top. This is gonna massively increase our capability of noise making.

>> The problem is it had been kept in a damp shed for a decade, and though the homemade trailer made it there perfectly, really, we had to get it back to the workshop and see what was going on. In actual fact, this was... There was a bit of water damage in there. There's an awful lot of leather bits and pieces. Effectively every one of its 244 palette valves, 488 pneumatic motors, 244 springs and magnets all had to be checked, removed, cleaned, when necessary replaced. It took a week, which is what this time lapse is of. We wouldn't make you sit through it in realtime. It was incredibly tedious and fiddly.

>> But a lovely piece of kit that we managed to get our hands on. The build quality is fantastic in this thing. It's full of rich mahogany.

>> So we also took the opportunity to split it into two, actually. So we've got two 128-note wind chests to stick in the truck. Just make it easier to mount. And I'm gonna have to move this on a bit, because we're running out of time. That's the state we're currently at with the organ build. The wind chest was done a couple of weeks ago. So now we've got capacity for an extra 244 pipes, which is more pipes than we've got. So we're in the process of either acquiring more theater organ pipework, which is very difficult, or we're gonna be faced with actually building that as well, which we've not ruled out. This was the last iteration of the solenoid driver I was thinking of making. We want to make it modular and scalable. Because if we want to add to it at any point, we want to just be able to fill another trailer with crap and plug it in. This is an 8-channel output board. We're gonna definitely go to PCB, because doing anything more than prototypes on VeroBoard is a bit odd. That's the organ side of the project. But it was never gonna be just about the organ. We wanted to put some other toys on it that we could play music on. The Zil is a ridiculous truck in itself. We wanted to make a ridiculous show to put on it.

So we thought it would be fun to build a musical Tesla coil. It seemed to make sense to start small with these things, because neither of us had built Tesla coils before, and I managed to wind a convincing-enough coil that was similar to others I had found online. And I built a driver board out of a load of salvage bits from some of Max's old mains inverters. I don't know if any of you have seen his channel, but he lives off-grid and makes videos about it, so as a result, he's got a pile of blown mains inverters and battery chargers, which is ripe for picking all sorts of useful power parts from. It was built with salvage bits and ended up being driven from a 300-volt DC power supply. We used an Arduino to receive MIDI signals, interrupted the coil's 250 hertz frequency at appropriate audio frequencies, and actually, it worked.

>> It kind of worked.

>> This is it playing the Russian national anthem.

(Tesla coil screeching the Russian national anthem)

>> Now, the driver wasn't quite capable of the power necessary to get proper arcs. Even so, the sound level of this was very loud. The full powered version should make a good solo instrument to accompany the organ, I think. But it's been a really steep learning curve. And if nobody has tried building a solid state Tesla coil, I guarantee hilarity. Broadband keeps rebooting. Lights are flashing on and off. You're constantly replacing starters and fluorescent tubes. I've got a bag of semi-conductors, diodes. It's quite good. This is a video of my voltage doubler going pop. This was a daily event. It's absolutely amazing! So really good at blowing up components. The problem is, with the coils that we want to put on the truck, these are the sort of transistors that we need to be using, and you're into a different league of hedonism there, because these things are a couple of hundred quid each, if you've got to buy them. They should be capable of switching 200 volts at about 60 amps. Blowing these is gonna be expensive. So we thought... Perfect blowing smaller transistors and move on to blowing big ones. These ones were salvaged from a scrap electric train. That's where we're up to the main core of the project, really. What's next?

>> I think next is to get the engine in the Zil and make it back into a truck. And get the box, which is still on the remains of the DAF. The DAF is still half with us. Get that box onto the Zil and then start building the organ in it. It's an awful lot of work to do. We're... Yeah. We were thinking of driving it here, but it hasn't got an engine, so we didn't. We've got a few people involved with side projects as well. A friend of ours is building a laser harp, which he intends to plug into it and use as a MIDI controller to play the organ with the harp.

>> He wants to put on a ballgown and do some laser harp shows with the Tesla coil.

>> Why not?

>> Seems very keen.

>> You've been playing that in your kitchen.

>> To be honest, I have been prototyping the laser system. These are cheap laser galvos and stuff, ordered from China. They're actually really rather fun. So far, we've really just used it as an excuse to put the smoke machine on in the kitchen on a night and just... Play around. You know, there's plans for other various audio visual effects. Probably involving propane, because me and Max are both into fire and explosions, and no Post-apocalyptic Soviet truck mounted pipe organ would be complete without it spewing fire, yeah? Anyway, that's where we're at. We're just about on our time limit as well.

>> Yeah, so thank you all for turning up and listening to us ramble on about our completely daft project. If anybody is interested in watching further, I've been told to give you a call to action, and watch my videos.

(applause)

>> Thanks very much, guys. We've got time for a few questions. Let's see some hands. One at the back.

>> You mentioned the air flow and the pressure. We wouldn't be talking normal high pressure stuff. What kind of pressure and air flow are you using to make these noises?

>> Okay. In organ building, pressure is measured in inches of wind, and church organ pipes start from about 3 inches of wind, and theater organ pipes typically around 10 to 15. And that is just how far that wind pressure can lift water in a tube. So if you blow into a tube and you lift that water 3 inches, that's 3 inches of wind pressure. So tiny pressures.

>> Hi. Your proper theater organ sound has a big tremulant. Are you gonna have a big tremulant? Please tell me you are.

>> I'm so glad somebody knows something here. No instrument would be complete without a tremulant. It's a bellows that wobbles the pressure of the wind supply up and down slightly and gives a tremulo, a vibrato, to the sound, and every rank will have its own tremulant, just like would you find on a Wurlitzer.

>> Talk to us about percussion.

>> We left out the percussion bit. Because we were running behind. We're aiming for a tuned percussion in the typical Wurlitzer way. Marimbas, xylophones, that sort of thing. But because we want to do drum and bass, having traditionally driven percussion like you would find on a theater organ -- they're always a little bit lame, so I suspect we'll use high pressure or massive solenoids.

>> Any more questions?

>> If there's any more questions, we're gonna be in the bar for the next couple of hours, drinking lots of beer. So feel free to come buy us lots of beer and talk to us.

>> Just a quick question. Can we have an update in two years' time?

(applause)

>> Yes. We're hoping to turn up with it, and make some noise.

>> Excellent. Thank you very much, guys! Give them a round of applause.

(applause)


