
KATE: Here to talk about the art and science of the motivational corporate anthem. I warn you now: There is very little art involved. There's a small amount of science that I'll throw in at the beginning to justify the rest of the talk. Which is largely laughing at corporate anthems. So I hope that's what you've come for. Yes, this is my serious bit to start with. There is a scientific basis for using music in the workplace. We have plenty of evidence that music can improve productivity, help you work faster, more efficiently, improve morale and mood, and happy workers work better. Different types of music are better for different scenarios. If you're doing a repetitive task, for example, music with lyrics can really help you do better. Whereas if you're doing something that requires more detail and more thought, then music without lyrics is better. But the main thing is choice.

So in all areas where music improves productivity, it's far more effective if the listener has chosen it themselves rather than have it imposed on them. And fortunately for me, most of the firms in the rest of my talk didn't get that memo. Otherwise there would be no talk. So music in the workplace appears in many ways. We have advertising jingles, CDs you hear in stores with the uncanny valley versions that just aren't right. Elevator music. We have sales singalongs, which merit their own talk, but I don't have time. Musical training videos. If you come and see me at any time in the fizzPOP tent, I'll show you some really awful stuff that I couldn't fit into the talk. But I'm going to focus on the motivational corporate anthem.

What makes this really special is the fact that it's generally commissioned by or sometimes written by upper management. The idea is to inspire and motivate a workforce that they may never meet but maybe can see from the stage at the annual conference when they introduce the song. The song is designed for internal purposes, really, and as I say, to inspire and motivate and get people fired up about working for a fantastic company. At least that's generally what they're going for. Since I only have 20 minutes, this is going to be sort of a whistlestop tour through the best of the best and the worst of the worst of the  genre. I'm not gonna go purely chronologically, but I'm gonna start with the first, which is IBM. To my knowledge, this is the first documented corporate anthem. So IBM was founded by Thomas Watson, and he was very pro music in the workplace. And in 1927, he had published this songbook, Songs of the IBM, which contains 100 songs to be sung by the workforce. They range from kind of hymns to the corporation itself, songs about how great Thomas Watson is, songs about other things and for each department as well. Of these 100 songs, the rally song is Ever Onward. It appears in the songbook, after America and the national anthem. This is a real rousing, marching kind of song to rally the troops. As I say, to get people fired up about working for IBM. Would you like to hear?

>> Ever onward, ever onward, that's the spirit that has brought us fame. We're big, but bigger we will be.

>> The words are here so you can sing along if you want to. Everybody!

>> We've fought our way through and new fields we're sure to conquer too. For the ever onward IBM! Second stanza!

>> Now, unfortunately... Oh, no, you're welcome. Please, come! Join in! Unfortunately, not everyone is as proud of their musical history as IBM. Have you finally got me on the big screen? Sorry. No wonder you weren't singing along! Not everyone is as proud of their musical history as IBM are. They kindly have the songbook on their website, they have mp3s on their website, recordings that I can grab and use in my talk. I know there are other companies between the '30s and the '70s who have corporate music, but I don't have any recordings of it. If you do, please come and see me at the fizzPOP tent. Bring me your corporate music! Things did happen in that period, in the '50s and '60s. A big thing was the industrial musical, which is exactly as it sounds. Broadway composers were commissioned to write entire musicals for car companies, often, and they took them on the road. That needs its own talk. There's a documentary about the industrial musical that came out this year that you should absolutely check out. But I'm going to stick to the corporate song and move to 1971, where Fujitsu commissioned Martha Miyaki, a famous jazz singer, to sing The Song of Fujitsu.

>> We'll run together going onwards now.

>> Very much of the time.

>> On towards our goal. Ahhhh, Fujitsu, oh, tomorrow is our goal.

>> I have days like that too. Don't you? As long as I make it to tomorrow. You know, that's not too painful. I could listen to that. It's fairly innocuous. It's not too grating. Where it starts to get grating is in the '80s, as you could imagine. The decade of big hair and shoulder pads and big marketing budgets and big power ballads. And raps, if you're lucky! Someone who was very prolific in the '80s, corporately musically speaking, was Apple. Apple were kind enough to create a large body of work, most of which were 5 or 6 minutes in length at least, so sadly I can't play you all of them, but I can play you this magnificent thing coming up, which has its own video. And it comes straight from VHS, but I'm not sure whether that perhaps enhances the experience.

>> First there was nothing... But the whole...

>> You may recognize the influence.

>> In your soul... 'til it cried to be free! And now look around. While the dream touched the world. In a flash, how we changed! All our lives! We are Apple! Lead the way! We are Apple!

>> It's quite a Literal Video.

>> And we're making a better today! What a feeling!

>> They just give up all pretense that this is not a different song.

>> It's believing! That tomorrow is crying for Apple...

>> I want to play the whole thing, but it's literally about five minutes long. And I'm sorry. I'm gonna skip onwards. Sorry! I know, if you come to the fizzPOP tent, I can play you any of these. So like Apple with their enthusiastic nod there to Flashdance, What a Feeling, many companies have created their corporate song by simply nicking somebody else's song and adding their own lyrics to it. I'm gonna quickly play you four, I think, and see if you can recognize the original song. The title is a bit of a giveaway on this.

(sax solo)

>> So these are all Ernst and Young employees, except I think the professional singer up front, who probably never thought this would see the light of day.

>> Oh, happy day!

>> Oh, happy day!

>> Oh, happy day!

>> Oh, happy day!

>> When Ernst and Young...

>> When Ernst and Young...

>> When Ernst and Young showed me a better way.

>> Oh, happy day!

>> Oh, happy day!

(whitest pseudo-Gospel hand claps ever)

>> So this is more recent. And people should have learned by this time to stop doing this.

>> Oh, we're teaming up. HP services has gotten power.

>> This one is actually quite decent.

>> And from now on you can forget about them. It's the system that'll do you right. And it might just change your life. It's the power of Sun. Yeah, that's the power of...

>> Okay. And this next one... I'm gonna play you one line of. And that's all you need.

>> We Built this Starbucks...

(laughter)

>> There is a line in it: Knee-deep in the mocha. I figure I just need to tell you that. You can imagine the rest. So that's all well and good and cringeworthy and painful. But you can get so much more creative with an original composition. As many of the following companies did. I'm gonna start with Asera, not because everyone remembers Asera, but because this is possibly the cringiest thing you've ever heard. This was created by an employee who apparently... He says on his own website... He's very proud of this. He took this to the executives with the idea of creating a couple of corporate songs, played them through his boombox, and they were blown away. Asera was a product of the dot com boom. So this is not an old thing. Not '80s old. I think it's also quite unexpected.

>> Asera Everywhere! So let me ask you... Are you ready to party?

>> Are you?

>> Are you ready to get funky? Put your hands together! Get in the groove now. Here we go. Yo, homegirls, homeboys, get it down. We're in command...

>> Can everyone hear this, by the way? That is fantastic. Yeah. So as I say... Yeah. I don't know if it gets any cringier than that. Although Apple have a challenge for you later in the talk. So Asera were not by any way the only company to he embrace rap. Several of them did it. I'm just gonna launch right into it. So Pricewaterhouse Coopers... To celebrate the merger of Pricewaterhouse and Coopers and Lyman, apparently there was an internal challenge to create a song to celebrate the event, and this was the rap version. Aren't the lyrics amazing?

>> Welcome to the firm that is known for innovation. Imagination. Fascination. Total global integration. Pricewaterhouse Coopers. PWC! Now, let me tell you a little about our key industries!

>> Aren't you on the edge of your seat? Ericsson. I think this was recorded in the work canteen.

>> Have you seen the light yet, baby? Seen the WAP glow in your neighbor's eyes? Do you want to get wireless with me tonight, baby? Give me your number and I'll send you something you'll never forget.

>> This is actually the chorus. Though there is a rap in there. I promise you. But this is the chorus that goes with that beginning.

>> Only voice -- all talk! No choice -- time for action! Only voice -- no crap! No choice. Just WAP!

>> Um... Arguably, the king of all corporate raps is the Symantec one, which was hailed by the Observer as the worst song in the history of music, with additional sinister corporate overtones. My daughter is very excited about this. This is actually her favorite song of the whole lot, and I've had to listen to this far too much.

>> Symantec is in the house! Come on, come on. See it, see it. Come on, come on. See the solution! Come on, come on! See it, see it! Come on, come on! Symantec Revolution! We're giving you sweet solutions! Symantec Revolution! We're giving you sweet solutions! We got your personal firewall. Security is where we stand tall!

>> I couldn't not let you hear any of that. So... We're gonna get a bit more serious now. I think part of the beauty of the corporate anthem is how seriously is generally takes itself. I think the best of them are the ones that just have no sense at all of how ridiculous they are. So... You've probably all heard... If you were here early, then you will have heard the KPMG one, but I'm just gonna play you a little snippet of it, because it's a classic. A classic.

>> KPMG, we're strong as can be. A dream of power and energy. We go for the gold. Together we hold onto our vision of global strategy! KPMG!

>> But possibly more serious than that were G4S. Do you remember the G4S, though? No? Around the time of the London Olympics, this came to light, and G4S buried it really quickly, but not quickly enough.

>> G4S, protecting the world. G4S, so your dreams can unfurl. 24/7, every night and day. Our warriors stand ready, so don't be afraid.

>> But they have nothing on Apple. Trust me. Nothing at all. So Apple, as I said, created a large body of work. And I think their most serious, their most sincere and earnest song, was Apple Ripples. And it starts off... I think in a spa. I'm not sure.

(birdsong, harps strumming)



>> Ten years ago, something happened. Something small. Something most people didn't notice. But it did touch a few of us. Then a few more. And a few more. One ripple following another. Each new wave gaining more distance than the last. And still the ripples keep coming.

(water splashing)

>> My husband complains about this, because that's not how ripples work.

(pseudo-Japanese music)

>> And then we have this spa music to lull you into a false sense of what this song is, and that continues for about 40 seconds, and then this happens.

(piano solo)

>> And if Meatloaf had been available, this is when he would have started to sing.

>> When we started out... Didn't have much to go on... There was nothing in our pockets but a dream! And in the silence of that first night, we made the promise that we would make it right!

>> It's really all about a journey. So the next thing... They go down to the river and they watch the river flow and there's a long road and I think there's a hill. It's all a metaphor. It's five and a half minutes long! I think they were going for a sort of Jim Steinman feel. Three and a half minutes in is the first mention of Apple with the classic line "Ohhhh... Apple." So I've managed okay, timewise. This means I have time to leave you with my very, very corporate anthem, which I think is genuinely nice. It's joyful. You think... I figure the guy that's singing it probably quite enjoys working for the company. It's got a rap. It's got a cool hook that you can sing along with. Because it goes na-na-na, so you don't need to know the words. And it's got a female backing singer somewhere in there. So I hope you've enjoyed this. Enjoy the rest of EMF, and please come see me in the fizzPOP tent to listen to more.

(synthy finger clicks, faux-Reggae beat)

>> Sorry, I didn't put the lyrics up for this.

>> Na-na-na-na-na! Na-na-na-na-na! Na-na-na-na-na! Na-na-na-na-na-na!

There was a dream, a dream that's ours. We want to be the best in the world. There is a dream! A dream that's ours! We want to be the best RNI in the world! We've given a world. We like this dream. Knowledge is Excalibur we're gonna wield. We are MC KC. McKinsey Knowledge Center! Na-na-na-na-na! Na-na-na-na-na!

>> Thank you very much!

(applause)

>> MCKC is the place to be! The team is great. One guarantees. You've got a quest, MCKC is gonna give you the best. MCKC (inaudible). MCKC! Challenges engage us. Nothing phases us. Come hell or high water, you cannot (inaudible). Challenge us. Engage us.

>> And I'm told we have time for a couple of questions? Does anyone have any questions? I didn't think so.

>> Burning bright and shining in the skies... MCKC... Burning bright and shining in the skies! MCKC, McKinsey Knowledge Centre! We are MCKC, McKinsey Knowledge Centre!

>> Unfortunately, these don't all reside on a website. There was a website. A guy called Chris Retig had a fantastic website that had tons of corporate music on it. Which I think he stopped maintaining. But there's a little story about that, because KPMG actually were not happy about him hosting the KPMG song and they got in contact and he got a takedown notice, because he was breaking their link policy, and their link policy is that you have to ask permission to link to their website!

>> Wow.

>> I don't think that actually achieved anything on their part. The other guy actually whose work has really helped me is Peter Judge. He used to write for ZD Net. I've actually never had to say that out loud anymore. Who put a lot of corporate anthem stuff on there. His stuff is mostly on there, but it's pretty hard to find on the ZD Net site itself. Just Google it. I will put my slides up somewhere, but I haven't thought about where yet. But yeah. Oh, sure. Yeah. Gonna put them on my LinkedIn. I think it's really important that people know this about me. Yeah. Thank you! Thank you very much! Sorry. Were there any more... Oh, hi!

>> Hey, have you ever heard the Avia Rap?

KATE: Avia?

>> If not, it's worth a listen. I mean, it's not, but it is.

KATE: That sounds good.

>> It's on YouTube, I think.

KATE: Cool. I do have, sadly, a lot of songs that didn't make the cut, just purely because of time. But I'm not sure about that one. I'm gonna look that up. Thank you. Sorry. I have another question? I can't believe people are asking questions.

>> Hello! Hi. If we're doing recommendations, have you seen the Microsoft/Bruce Springsteen Tribute Band?

>> Yes. Yes. Yes. Again... Yeah. Bruce Springsteen and sort of... That style, I think... I think that's possibly also a bit of what Apple was going for with the Meatloaf thing. Meatloaf, Bruce Springsteen. Yeah, he's very popular. Maybe the next talk. I should ask for more than 20 minutes next time and play you longer clips.

>> Thank you very much for sharing all your songs with us!

KATE: Cheers!

(applause)


