TIM: Whoever feels responsible, just wave your hand. All right. That's what I wanted. All right. Hello! Thanks for coming. I am going to talk about the secret powers of podcasting! So who am I? I'm Tim Pritlove. I am living in Germany, in Berlin. And I do podcasting a lot. It actually all started on the radio, around... I forget. 20 years ago, or so. I liked radio. I talked talking into microphones. But I always had a problem with the distribution part of it. The way it's framed by time constraints. And intermixed with weird... How you are supposed to talk to the audience, depending on the radio station. So I liked it, but I didn't love it. Then podcasting came along. And I saw... Wow! That's something for me! And I started my own project. Called Mitte Level. Because I found out that if you're in a good discussion, that's where you want to come to. If you're on top of everything, you reach the Mitte stage. And that's where I wanted to be. I also started a small Open Source software project called Podlove, which is providing some tools to the general public. I'm going to talk about this later on.

So what is this about? This talk? I have accumulated some experience doing podcasts. I do a lot of podcasts. I have ten shows or so. Not all of them are very active. Around six are more or less on a regular basis. And I have a large audience I can talk to. And that's why I found out how this works, or at least what I think... How this works and why this should matter to you. So I'm going to talk about why podcasts matter at all. I'm going to talk about why podcasts are actually useful for a lot of things. Maybe how podcasts can help you. In whatever you're doing. And therefore why you would probably want to start a podcast, and if you want to do a podcast, how to do your own podcast. But maybe the main question you have in your mind is: What are these podcasts anyway?

So we'll start with a small poll. Who thinks she knows what a podcast is? Raise your hand if you think you know what a podcast is. I will say something like 80%. So there's work to be done. Who actually listens to podcasts? Doesn't need to be on a regular basis. I would say it's the exact same. 80%. Who actually does a podcast? On his or her own? One or two. I'm not going to express this in percentage. Who has been thinking about doing a podcast? That's like... Five times as much. You are my audience. And who has no time for podcasts and doesn't care? Or doesn't care? One. That's fine. We can move on. So let me clear up some confusing terminology first. So there's podcasting and there's podcasts. What's the difference? When I talk about podcasting, I refer to the technology. I refer to how this thing works. And podcasting is basically a distribution technology.

That's the idea. It's like... How is this stuff actually passed along on the internet? And this technology basis is the cool thing about podcasts. That's what made my head click when I first encountered it. Because it's just very suited to both the internet and how people should or want to consume content on the internet. So it all comes down to three letters called RSS. RSS was a very super simple format that was capable of transforming blogs into media, and then podcasts into real media. Because there was a way... How to subscribe to it. So it's all about the subscription. It's all the way... How you attach to your source, and that you can't really lose track of what's coming. Without you having to spend much time or energy to follow up on what's happening. If there's something happening, you will know. If there's nothing happening, you don't have to care, and you shouldn't.

So that's a good thing. And there is this download thing! You know, the thing you always look for on a YouTube page, and it sucks that there isn't one. And you know why there isn't one? Because they want you to stay on the page. They want you to be in this media Wonderland, powered by ads, powered by your attention, and podcasts don't care. Podcasts do it the other way around. It's all about the convenience and the convenience is the download. Because as you'll find out, if you're at one of these camps -- at least when you're setting them up -- there's probably no internet when you need it. But the podcast is always there when there's no internet, and that's good. For no apparent reason, here's the list of five people who are very... Have been very helpful to this whole podcasting thing to work. There's Dave Winer, the guy who came up with all those RSS ideas.

Which still work great. And also I like his style and his general setting. He's very cool to follow. There's Christopher Lydon, who was sort of the first one using this technology. Or actually delivering content that was using this technology. And also starting the idea of doing interviews on the internet. There's Ben Hammersley from the UK, who dropped the term podcast, which was just fine. And then there's this weird Adam Curry, who encouraged developers to actually create a podcast client. So thanks to all those White dudes. But there's one more. It's you! It's the audience. It's the people who do it. Podcasting really has become a thing on its own, and it's powered by the people, and it's powered not only by a few, but it's really powered by a lot! And most people are contributing to podcasting by listening to podcasts.

So what about listening to podcasts? First of all, I think you should do it! It's a very, very healthy thing to do. Podcasts can help you! And the best is: Do it while you are doing other things! It's really helpful. It's both helpful for listening and it's both helpful for doing the things! Because your mind is nourished. All the information. While you do tasks that are basically boring. Driving a car. Running around through the woods. Doing your chores. Housework. All these things tend to be totally boring. Actually become super exciting when you're also listening to a podcast while doing it. And as an extra hint, get out. Get out into the fields. Get out into the woods. If you're outside and you're listening to a podcast, it becomes even more super amazing. You're on holiday, you walk the streets of a city you have never been to. The podcast you are listening to right now, at that moment, you will probably remember all the topics attached to all those streets and things you saw for years to come.

It's really amazing how these things match up. And another recommendation is: Use the pod. I know many people think the pod is the iPod. But I really more refer to its original meaning. It's this small thing you have in your hand. It's where everything is. Where you store your stuff that you need. So today the pod is of course the smartphone. It's helped podcasting a lot. And the good thing is that there are so many dedicated apps that are delivering podcasts probably the way you want it to. There are many, many, many clients available. And you can just choose any. Try them all. Find out what suits your needs. If you're more in... Oh, I need to listen to them one after the other, and I can't get enough of it... Or if you want to have something that makes it easier to pick, easier to select even parts of a podcast, so that you can really find a mode in which podcasting comes to your life in a way that suits your life.

Along with clients comes directories, and also platforms. And that's something I think you should be aware of. Depending on your opinion here. In the beginning, there was iTunes or how it's called these days... Apple Podcasts. There is some general misunderstanding of what Apple Podcasts actually is. It is basically a directory. It's a directory of feeds. So those URLs that actually point to the RSS content, and that's it. That's all. Of course, they attach all the extra data, ratings, and other statistics to it, more and more. But as a podcaster, Apple Podcasts are still very friendly to podcasters, because everything that is displayed, apart from comments, of course, is more or less provided by you. You are in control. And being in control, I think, is one of the more important and really nice things about podcasting.

In general, I think there is no need for platforms. Of course, there are a lot of platforms coming up. Google is starting a podcast site. Which sounds like the same as Apple is doing, but it's not, really. Because then they want to host your stuff, deliver your stuff. There might be good technical reasons for that, but... Everything that's being taken away from you... You should think about this twice. Even more, this applies to things like Spotify. Other platforms. Basically they're all inviting you to a walled garden, and once they're all there, they want to define the rules. And that's a problem. And I will expand on this later on. There are other Open Source directories that also serve you as a resource to find stuff. Like the fyyd project, which originated in Germany. There are others. Fyyd is quite nice. So I can recommend that. Yeah. I think that's something you should be aware of.

So... Why do podcasts matter to people? What makes it so attractive? First of all, you find out, if you're interested in a thing, there's a good chance there's at least one podcast about this thing. And it doesn't matter how far from other people's reality this thing is. Your very special interest, niche, is probably already covered. If it's not, that's your podcast niche! That's what you have to go for. Because if nobody is already talking about it, and you think it's interesting, there's a good chance other people will find this interesting too, and that's the kind of people you want to talk to. So these are very vertical target groups, how you would call this in marketing speak. But it makes sense! Because everybody is totally going crazy about mass markets, large numbers, and so on. But in the end, it doesn't really matter so much how many people you actually reach. It's how good is this contact you are making to these people.

And even more important, who is it you are actually reaching? If you reach ten super important people of a certain niche, that's much more than talking to 1,000 people who don't care. And that's what podcasts are really, really good at. So podcasts are also a very independent medium. That's complicated to support, I think. Along with blogs, podcasts have been able to retain this independence, first of all because they are not supported by platforms so much. If you talk about video, your video is usually not mattering much, if it's not on one of the big platforms. Or big platform. Because people don't find it. People are not used to discover video on any other way than by searching a platform. Maybe they use search engines sometimes. That's also a possibility. But most people just turn to YouTube and look for it, and if it's not there, it doesn't exist. That's not yet what's happened to podcasts. And I hope this stays this way.

Even more important, it's in my opinion the most personal medium there is. What do I mean by that? It's very personal in two ways. It's very personal in the way it is consumed. You plug your earphones in. You walk around the streets. You're totally on your own. And voices are talking to you. You know? It's a very intimate relationship. Nobody is watching you while doing it. And even if somebody is watching you, they don't know what you're listening to. So it doesn't matter. This frees your mind. It's something different than looking on a screen. Also, it's very personal in the way it is delivered. Podcasts usually tend to have a totally different tone when talking to their audience than the way you find people speaking in videos, on TV, or in radio.

So even radio is different, and if I would give this talk in a radio voice, you will notice, and you will hate it. So it's the voice that matters. And I think many people are overlooking the power of the voice in podcasting. Why is the voice so important? First of all, it's our primary communication system. If you meet somebody, you don't start writing notes on paper and passing them around. You talk to them. And if you finally meet somebody and can actually listen to somebody, that forms your opinion much more than anything else you might have read. It's very important to calibrate how you think about other people. And that way it's both capable of building trust and the opposite, of course, too. Because then you know, like, I don't really like this guy. Because... You know, something is wrong. Because you can transport so many things in your voice.

And you can't really hide behind your voice. So the voice is very important for credibility. It's very important for emotion. And, of course, the irony. And whoever has written something on the internet, published it, and there was irony in it, guess what happens? People misunderstand you! Either because they want to, or they just don't get it. And it might be your fault. Might be their fault. The problem is: Writing and reading means extra encoding and decoding. And the voice is basically encoding/decoding free. Of course, there is encoding and decoding, but that's more or less done in realtime. Everything else is work for your mind. So that's why the voice is so important, and that's why podcasting is important, as a medium on the internet, because it takes this situation of the radio, of being the primary delivery of voice, and gives it back to the people.

Another thing that's happening is that there is far less prejudice involved when you are listening to people. The images are gone. You don't say like... Ugh, I don't like how this guy looks. You know? This lookism, this what you think of people just by looking at them, without really having interacted with them, that's absent in the voice world. Because the first time you notice somebody, there's already communication involved. Voice is communication, and your opinions are delivered on what you communicate with. Or what gets communicated to you. So that's helpful, especially for some communication. I'm not saying the voice is something that's totally free of prejudice. Of course, if you have a weird voice or something that is considered to be a weird voice, it will still be a problem to get past these prejudices. But it helps a lot. Believe me.

So having said all these things, you probably think, like, that sounds nice. Maybe I will start my on podcast. So how do you start a podcast? First of all, it's easy to say: You just have to do it. Don't overthink it. Just grab a microphone and start doing things. And publish them always as well. Because doing a podcast, recording it, and storing it on PodcastOnemp3 doesn't really help. But if you want something that is a bit successful in the terms I told you before, that you want to reach a certain audience, you need to think about what to do. What to actually do. So I think it comes on to two things. First of all, think about: What do you want to convey? What do you want to actually put out? What is your original content? What is your original interest? What matters to you?

That's much more important of what you think of what others expect. Just find the source of information, where you can actually talk about, where you really have the feeling that you need to clarify, need to explain, want to discuss, think it matters, maybe it's something you don't understand. And you want to learn by talking about it. It doesn't matter. But these are the most important decisions in the first step. Think about what matters to yourself, and then you can go to next step and think about: Who is it for? Who do I want to talk to? Who is it that might be interested in what I have to say? And it doesn't really matter, again, how many people these are. It's just like... Who is it? Who do I want to talk to? If I have three free wishes, who are the kind of people I want to be sitting in front of me, so that I can talk to them? That's the audience you're looking for.

And you find this audience by talking to them without knowing them. Because if you start talking to them, they will find you. The audience is coming to you. Just by radiating the right stuff. So when you think about who to talk about, you have to think about community in general. And when you want to grow your podcast, when you want to grow the audience, always grow naturally. And I call this the ring theory, because I think it sounds cool. Actually, I got rings involved. Start with your core. Always talk to the core community. The people that you think you know, maybe even the people you already know. Like, all your very close friends or people who are involved in what you want to talk about. And then continue doing it. And then by time, you will find out that you are... You know, you'll find out what it is you're really interested in. Which might deviate a bit from what you originally started with. You'll find out what works. You'll find out where you get feedback. You'll work with the feedback. And then what happens? People who are listening to you start talking to their friends.

And those friends are going to be invited. Hey, you really should listen to this podcast! Because it's interesting! Or... It will change your life! Or whatever. That's how it grows. And then you will have this outer ring of friends of friends of friends that are actually, you know, also interested, but didn't know that you exist or didn't even know that this topic could be that interesting. And once you have reached this stage of growth, then you might be able to reach a public that didn't even think about that this could be interesting at all. Or probably even have heard about podcasts. But now find podcasts interesting, because that's what you talk about. So grow from within to the outside. And always remember: Numbers are relative and don't really matter. It's about the quality of your audience that matters.

And it's also very important that you find your own comfort zone. Be comfortable in what you do. Don't think that you need to talk about something because somebody told you so or you think it could increase your audience. Whenever you try to appease unknown people, you will probably fail. So do this over and over again. And once you have started your podcast, make it ten. Ten podcasts, ten shows, and you can call it a podcast. That's my experience. Usually coming to ten can be very, very complicated. Once you are adding a digit, things get a lot easier. You know what you want to talk about. You know what you don't want to talk about. You know how you want to talk about it, and so on and so on and so on. Of course, some people might be able to find it sooner. Some people need longer. But I would say ten is a good thing.

So... Then at a certain point you need to think about: Who is doing this podcast, and how are you doing it? And that's not that easy to answer. You might have no friends interested in your topic. And then you start with monologues. You grab your microphone, and you just talk to the invisible guy. Somewhere out there. Hello! I know you're there. Here's what I thought about... And this is a random collection of my thoughts. Some people are really talented at this. But I think most are not. If you are not the kind of person who can just stand in front of a stage and out of nothing talk endlessly about whatever, monologues are probably not your thing. So... Don't push it. If it doesn't come naturally, it's probably not for you. Much better? Dialogues.

I think this is sort of where the majority of podcasts work. Dialogue means two people. Could be more. The style is important. That you discuss with each other. One person presents information. The other person asks about it. Did I understand this right? What do you mean by this? Do you really think this is so important? I've never heard of it. The other person -- and this can change throughout the podcast, of course -- who is playing which role -- is sort of the stand-in for the audience. At least, a temporary stand-in for the audience. Filling this need for somebody listening to it is like... Oh, I know, I know. I want to ask a question. Stop, stop, stop! This permanent wish of podcast listeners to somehow jump into the studio and ask a question. There's a good chance that once you are doing your show in a dialogue, that you already have this dynamic. And it's very pleasing to listeners, who somehow think like... Oh yeah. Well, that's exactly the question I wanted to ask. And then they feel very warm and welcome in your dialogue.

For some things, you might open this up to a larger group. I'm not sure there is a real limit on how many people can endure on listening to them. I would say five, maybe. But it really depends on the people in the group. I've seen groups who are really structured. Never talk into each other. Somehow know that it is very complicated to remember names, and somehow, you know, do this... Oh! Tom! What would you say about this? You know? Kara, have you thought this through? If you are helping the audience by inserting cues, or you just have the blessing of totally different voices that are really easy to record, that might work. But always think about people listening to it. And if everybody is just talking about each other, all time, at the same time, this can become a train wreck pretty soon. How much time is left? 20 minutes? Yes.

So another question is: Publishing cycles. How much do you actually need to talk? And also the question of how long the podcast is. Actually, I haven't prepared a slide for this. But talking about this, it really depends. Some people think short podcasts are good because people don't have the attention span to follow a long podcast. I can tell you from my experience the only request I ever had was: Oh my God. You could have talked another hour about this. It wasn't detailed enough. Podcasts are for details. Podcasts are to get into stuff, really, really down to the core. And that's why people are listening to it. So don't think so much about the length. You can stop them. You can rewind them. You can listen to them again. And if you don't like it, you can skip ahead. There are chapter marks. You can use all these tools. Don't think about the lengths.

That doesn't mean you have to repeat the same stuff over and over again and just talk about the same thing all the time. That's not helpful! But the length itself is not so important. What might be more important is the cycles. What can you do? You can do a daily podcast. Oh my God. This is a lot of work. I warn you: Don't do it! Don't do it. Unless you are really into the podcasting stuff. You have your setup ready. Your life can accommodate an hour every day or more to support this. This is probably only for professional podcasters. But it's also only for content that really changes on a daily basis and needs commenting on a daily basis. Because otherwise you just run out of topics and repeat yourself. Much more helpful and probably a good start for anything that is related to news, ongoing events, things that change regularly, is the weekly period.

Because in a week, we think about things in week terms. We think about, like, what happened last week. Oh, in a week, things can change. And so on. People remember weekdays, and know when your podcast is supposed to come out. So a lot of very helpful things. In terms of work, it's still a lot of work! Weekly podcasts are a lot of work. I always wanted to have the word "fortnightly" on my slides. So now is the time. Every two weeks actually works pretty good for a lot of things. That's something I could recommend if you are really looking for something that really has the regular podcast stamp on it. But you are still working towards the capability of doing on a regular basis. Every two weeks is good for both producers and consumers of content. Works well. You always have a free week where there is nothing, which is a relief.

And same goes for people listening to it. Actually, people who somehow are still in the process of... Come to know you, understand what this is about... They can drop out for a week, they can even drop out for two weeks, but it's always possible to follow up on what you are delivering. Again... The periodic question is much more interesting than the length of the podcast. You can have, like, double length, but only two weeks, and it works better than half of it every week. Three weeks, also fine. Very good for stuff that is somehow eternal content. Interviews about topics that you can listen to in five years from now, and they are still valid. You know, like how the railway works or what the history of the Romans were. That's not going to change so soon. And you can increase this to monthly. And I think that's the end. Don't do a podcast that is, you know, taking longer than a month to come out on a regular basis.

But you can also do a podcast whenever you feel like. So irregular podcasting is also fine. Once people are interested in it, in the end, it doesn't really matter. So if you prepare your podcast, there are probably two rules you could follow. First rule is: Do not prepare. Overprepared podcasts are sometimes very problematic. Because you tend to know everything in advance, and then you are coming up with questions just to somehow make this specific answer you're looking for to come out. That's super boring. Super boring for everybody. Don't do it. Another way to approach is prepare a lot. But this more applies to stuff where you are somehow translating information that has come out.

If you are reading the news for your audience, following a news cycle, making your own opinion, really trying to understand what happened, then it's really very important to really prepare. Because once you start talking, and you don't really know what was happening before, that's where it really becomes problematic for everybody. So in general, there's this golden rule of thumb. You have to find your balance here. Also important, especially because, as I said before, podcasts are such a personal thing, do interact with your audience if the audience is willing to interact with you. Feed from feedback. Everything you get is valuable. Things that were good, things that were bad. What you could also do, because this is really the thing that will keep up your motivation in the long run. You might be motivated to do things without... You know, you don't care who's listening to it. Because you just wanted to say it. But at a certain point, the motivation is going to change, and then you really have to find a way to interact. So accept the commenting culture as it is.

It's usually much better in the podcast world. It's not like in blogs. Because people actually have to listen to what you say before they can comment. If they comment without listening to you, you and everybody else will immediately notice that this was happening. So you don't care. So I would say the troll quota in podcast comments is minuscule, compared to the written web. It's fascinating. I'm not saying there are no trolls. There are. But right now, the situation is much better. I got lots of feedback from podcasts that were on problematic issues. Gender equality, feminism, and so on. If you do a blog on feminism, oh, boy. You know, you hate the internet. If you do a podcast on it... It's different! It's really, really different. The commenting culture is much better. After a while, you might consider to do it live. That doesn't make sense for all the podcasts.

But if you are sending a podcast live and you're capable of doing this, then you will attract people into a live chat, for instance, and you get feedback in realtime. That's more work, so only do it once everything else is set. But it can be helpful to really find out who are your core contributors. And if it's only the people themselves that you can find that you can ask for favors or get into a dialogue with, it's helpful. And every now and then, if your podcast has been kind of popular, do it on stage. Also a very satisfying thing to do. I've done it many times now, and I can't stop doing it! So at the end, some hints on what technology you need.

And you'll always hear like -- oh my God. Audio. It's so complicated. And so expensive. And you can do so many things wrong. That's true. Here is a guide to fast success. First of all, you need a microphone, and I can only recommend head sets. Headphone and microphone in combination is just the best. Why? First of all, very compact. You don't need a stand. There's no table where the microphone erupts when you start tapping on it. And these things. You always have this constant distance to the microphone, which is especially good if you talk to people who have no experiences with microphones and don't know that it makes a huge difference how far away you are from your microphone. So the good headsets are expensive. Buy them anyway. Because if you buy cheap, you buy it three times.

This is the model I'm using. You don't have to do it. It's the Beyerdynamic B9227. There are other options, but the good stuff is always in the same financial ballpark. Then you need a mixer. Because you want to listen to what you say. And in case you wondered why you need to have a headphone, well... First of all, think about intros, jingles, audio. You want to play back to everybody in this situation. And comment on. So headphones are helpful anyway. But also you can have very relaxed positions. You can sit meters or yards away from each other. How you say? And you can still talk in a calm voice. Also, it's a much more intimate experience for everybody. People just calm down. So headphones are fine. But you need a mixer to mix all this together, to create the signals. Recorders. This has been a nightmare until recently. Because... How to wire everything up in the recording and the cabling and so on. There are so many things you can do wrong. But there is help. Zoom has finally delivered a device that everybody wants. It's the L-12 LiveTrak. It's a mixer. It's a recorder. It's very good for live setups too.

And it's mostly digital. And you can still use it as an audio interface at the same time. So you get mixing, recording, and delivery to a computer that you might need. In one box. And that's it! That's what you need for a professionally produced podcast these days! There are other options available. And if you want to walk around and be more mobile, you will probably need to look for other options. But yeah. Actually, there is a step three. Because there's added value to record your stuff on a computer, while you do it. You can still use this recorder. There's an SD card. You put the files on your computer. Everything is fine. But for a more capable environment, recording to a professional audio software has its values. And there is an interesting solution of course from Germany. It's built on the American Digital Audio Workstation Reaper. Which is super fast, super cheap, and very ugly to use. UltraSchall, which is a system that somehow skins the system, adds functionality, removes all the crap you don't need as a podcaster, so turns a digital audio workstation meant for creating music into an audio workstation meant for creating podcasts. You can do live chapter marks. It renders your stuff perfectly, automatically adjusts volume levels, and so on. It's a box of stuff. You just buy Reaper for a few bucks and you add UltraSchall in your set.

If you want to do publishing, of course I have to now recommend our own project. There are other solutions, but not so many and not so good. First of all, the Podlove team has produced the Podlove Publisher. It's actually a plugin for WordPress, so for many people, this is already an environment they already use, it's readily available and widespread, and many people know how to deal with its insufficiencies. So with Podlove Publisher, you get an integrated solution, where you can just pour your podcast in. It produces the feed, and everything. Has detailed analytics. Other things... It's very nice. We have also added the subscribe button, which makes subscribing to podcasts easier for people. So whenever you put up this button, people can just press a button, select their podcast client they want to use, and then if you select it, you can... It automatically opens the podcast app, or you can copy the URL. Whatever you want. And of course, you can customize this button to look like you want. There are certain styles. It's multilingual, and so on.

So it works fine. It's in widespread use already. Best of all, there's a web player that comes with it. So not only do you publish your podcasts to podcast clients in a feed. No, you can publish it on the web. It's a full blown player that works really nice. And has a lot of very sophisticated features, including, coming soon, transcripts! That are actually moving while you're listening to it! And it's super awesome. And the future! So... That more or less concludes what I have to convey to you. That was my personal podcast for you. And if you have some questions, I'm happy to take them.

(applause)

Do we have microphones? There's a microphone that is being handed around.

>> Hello. Do you have any advice for recording podcasts on location at conferences, events, EMF, et cetera?

TIM: Like here?

>> Yeah.

TIM: Get a caravan. That's helpful. Because then you have seats and a table. That's how I do it. Is that the kind of... Can you take the microphone again? Sorry.

>> I work for a publisher, and we do a lot of conferences and events. And what we're trying to do is speak to people after they presented a paper and then grab them for 15 minutes before they then go off and do their own thing. The problem we've got is quite often there's background noise, there's portability of equipment, there's mixing after the event that you think... Oh, God, I wish we'd managed to isolate that, and so on, so any advice, really.

TIM: First of all, I think the background noise is usually not a big problem once you work with headphones. That's where headphones really come in handy.

>> We haven't been doing that. So I'm going to do that.

TIM: Yeah. So some people like these clip-on microphones, and think... Especially if there's a camera, think that headphones look ugly. I don't think so. And, you know, if that's your problem, you won't be able to produce something. If you have a headset, I think... I've done this. It works well. The main problem is the organizational part. How do you get these people in time? So you need a crew. Real planning and logistics to have everybody show up at the right time. And know who to talk to, and so on. There are many aspects. We can talk after the talk. Over there?

>> Hello! I was just wondering: You were talking about audience... Like, community on the web. And responding to comments and so on. How many platforms on the web would you want to use to stay in touch with your audience? I mean, you were saying WordPress. Would you just stick with WordPress? Or would it be good to have... I mean, I don't particularly want to do a blog.

TIM: Yeah. So I think it's a matter of personal taste. I try to get everybody to comment on my own blog. For various reasons. Because that's where you can find all the show notes and the transcripts and everything, so people are actually at the right place, where there is the primary information. Of course, I get also a lot of feedback on Twitter. I like Twitter, because I think the follower model works really well for podcasters, and I personally hate Facebook, so I don't use it.

>> Thanks for the talk! So does monetization work okay with this model? Because you don't...

TIM: Speak up a bit?

>> Sorry. Because you don't have adverts, really, in podcasts so much.

TIM: Money? Let's talk about money. I haven't included it in the slides, because I don't think it should be the most important thing.

>> Yeah, I do agree. But I think that's one reason why people might go to something else, like Spotify or something. You know?

TIM: Yeah. So... It's a culture thing. In America, and as far as I know also partly in the UK, people think that ads are the primary way to go. I don't think so. I don't like ads, because they get in the way. They are somehow... Interfering with my message and my voice, and that's something I don't want. You know? So it's a personal preference of mine. It is also possible to do it without. Especially because you have this very... Or you are capable of establishing a very strong relationship with your community. And when you have a very specific topic you are talking about that people find valuable, they will be more than willing to support you financially on a direct way. You could choose to go to one of those funding platforms. They have their problems as well. I think they take still a bit too much of the money. But they might be helpful reaching out. It's something I don't use as well these days.

You can find your model. But I think it's always worth thinking about not doing with ads in the first place. And only if you don't see any other solution. Then maybe.

>> Thanks, yeah. I was just wondering about just how people make money. So it's really about building the community? So for people doing it professionally, they build a very strong community that then supports them directly?

TIM: I'm not sure I got the question. What's...

>> It's not really a question. It's just something... You know, sort of like saying... Instead of going on video, so that you can share ads, you're more building a strong community?

TIM: All right. So... How much time? We're running out of time. So maybe last question.

>> Thanks, yeah. Just a very quick question. It strikes me that podcasts primarily are a reflective medium. They're great for talking about issues and sharing information around communities, but what about intervening in issues? I'm interested in setting up a podcast that is able to intervene and is faster moving. Is there a role for podcasts in that kind of sphere?

TIM: I'm not sure I got your question right.

>> How can a podcast intervene? If you've got a fast moving political situation? There's lots going on now.

TIM: Intervene? I think podcasts are the place for debate, because they take their time and they can provide the necessary context to understand it. I'm listening to the Remainiacs Podcast, because that's the only place where I think people are talking about the right things when it comes to Brexit. There is no other source I've found where people are not totally out of their mind. And the same goes for many other things. So that's where I think you don't really have to be in the same speed with news flow. It's actually worth taking a break, resting on a few issues, and build more understanding and provide more insight into: Why is this happening? Has this happened before? What can happen in the future? I think it's this context, and it's also the opinion people are actually looking for. They don't have to necessarily agree with everything you say, but they just like to find people who actually have an opinion. You know? That's not just formed by media bias and other things.

And that's where podcasts are really helpful. All right. So... If you have more questions, I'm happy to take them outside. Thanks for listening. Goodbye.

(applause)



>> Thanks, Tim. Just a reminder for attendees. We very much need volunteers for these things. And Hebocon is at 7:00, outside the bar tonight, if you want to watch robots fighting each other!


