
>> Welcome to Tent C. A couple of announcements you've probably heard from absolutely everywhere. Please turn off amplified music by 11:00 tonight or bad things happen to us. And also, they really need people to work behind the bar tonight. So if you fancy learning about the lucrative world of bar staffing, then now is the time to learn. Apart from that, I'm very happy -- a slightly guilty talk, because I know I'm not very good at this, and I know lots of us aren't -- are from making to maintenance by Laura James.

>> Hi. I'm gonna be talking about maintenance. Challenges and opportunities. And how I came to be organizing a festival of maintenance on the 22nd of September, which is quite soon now. So I can't see you at all, but hands up if you're a member of a makerspace or hackspace or any similar community. Keep your hands up if you play any role in actively looking after that space. Okay. I have all the maintainers here. So that's awesome! Cool. That's quite rare. People tend not to think about maintenance. I'm here because last December we had Maker Assembly, which is a get-together of a lot of maker culture and makerspace people. And we really were trying to talk about local manufacturing, the circular economy, and things like that.

But what kept coming up was makerspace sustainability and who looks after things in the maker world. And that really kind of made us wonder if we should do something about it. A lot of maker culture is about making new things. In a lot of Western contexts, that's gadgets and gizmos, things that are fun for a while, but eventually gather dust until they're thrown away. Making useful things does happen, but it's a little less visible, a little less exciting. So we used to do more making and repairing and maintaining and mending the everyday items that we have, and we've started to do that less as it's cheaper to get new things and more expensive to maintain them. At Maker Assembly, we really felt that the making and manufacturing of essential items made locally and repaired and looked after locally could be a good thing for the UK.

We were looking ahead to both dystopian and utopian futures, and in both cases it seemed like we needed to get better at looking after things. And we talked about makerspace sustainability, which is quite relevant to this crowd. It's extremely unevenly distributed. There are long-lived makespaces. I'm from Cambridge makespace, and we celebrated our fifth birthday this year. But a lot of spaces are set up without thought to maintenance. They get initial capital, some grants, but they don't think about how they sustain. And it can be difficult to get money later on. So we've seen a lot of spaces closing down over the last couple of years, which is sad. But it's interesting when you think about making and maintaining. Although maker culture and makerspace tools make it easier to look after stuff, actually, when you're making stuff, it's way easier and nicer to use new parts than try to scrabble round reusing bits and pieces.

And it's fun to make new things, but not so much fun to look after them. This is an example from Liverpool. They made a knitting machine. It was really cool and they loved showing it off at makefests and things. But now it's broken and no one can really be arsed to fix it up. That's a classic makespace dynamic. And one of the challenges is that good maintenance, like in the case of car maintenance, is invisible. You don't know that things are being repaired. It's good when you don't realize it's happening. Except of course when it's not. This is Kintsugi. Visible maintenance. Visible repair. Here's an example, which is darning. The visibility is kind of relational. Maintenance work still happens whether the result is visible or not. And it's only rendered invisible to the people who aren't paying attention.

Some objects, you do kind of know they're being maintained. But stuff that is ready to use every day by lots of people without showing any traces of maintenance is quite rare. There's also examples where we've designed out maintenance. In one laptop per child, it was designed to be resilient but not to be repaired. It was almost impossible to repair the screens and power supply when they broke. Digital maintenance -- in many cases this is hidden under layers of things. Facebook and Google are really dependent on Wikipedia content, which is really below the hood. We all know that Wikipedia needs maintenance, but when you see that content through Google, you tend to forget that maintenance needs to be happening somewhere else. How do we value the work of maintenance, when, if it's done well, you don't even notice it? It's hard to recognize it, because it's out of sight and out of mind.

And maintenance just isn't as cool as making new things. If you make new things, you get attention. You get to stand on stages giving talks. But keeping stuff running, cleaning equipment, looking after communities, be that online or offline, looking after relationships, repairing equipment, all these things tend not to get you much attention. Much interest. Even though makers do need the things that they use to be maintained as well. All our businesses and organizational forms and investment tend to be biased towards making new stuff. It's much easier to say I'm gonna make a business to make new things and sell them than it is to say: I'm gonna have a business that's gonna look after stuff and care for it and keep it in use. Starting a new innovation project in your company is really straightforward, but starting a social enterprise or co-op that might be building for the long term, creating something that will be looked after for five years or ten years, is much harder.

We do have some encouraging things. There are more commons models, things like Creative Commons, digital content, that are starting to make it easier to think about business models that sustain stuff. But it's still a little bit more challenging than you would think. And there is also something about culture. We don't value maintenance like we do invention. We don't recognize maintainers like we do makers. And think about all the different places where maintenance happens in our world. Repairing infrastructure. Fixing stuff that breaks. Finding places where older items might be valued. Stewarding shared resources so that the communities can benefit from them. You've got to really design for that, and we don't always do that in our culture today.

We think innovation is like magic lightbulb moments, but technology is not the same as innovation. Innovation is just a small piece of what happens in tech. We're very preoccupied with novelty, but it fails to account for the supportive technologies that are in widespread use, and it obscures how many of the things around us are really old. So in his book Shock of the Old from 2007, the historian David Edgerton talks about technology in use and finds a lot of common objects like electric fans and many bits that you might find in cars have been unchanged for a century or more. And when you think about that sort of broader perspective, you can really see that maintenance is out there even for tech stuff. We just don't think about it. We think that innovation stories are white guys in garages in California. But people around the world are thinking about technology in different ways. They're thinking not just about production but about repair and reuse. So while novel objects tend to preoccupy the most privileged parts of society, folks in places that are less privileged are thinking less about novelty and more about keeping essential things running. And the most remarkable tales of cunning effort and repair in maintaining technologies are happening elsewhere. Perhaps not so much in our world.

And we tend to forget infrastructure as well. Infrastructure is this really unglamorous term. The kind of word that would have sort of vanished from our dictionaries long ago, if it wasn't so socially important. But if we talk about infrastructures more, we move away from the technical matters to the sort of deeper questions, the moral implications. And if some of you were in the ethical software talk earlier, talking about how civil engineering developed greater practices of ethics after things like bridges failed, that's something which we're still thinking about now in society. Train crashes, bridge failures, urban flooding. These are manifestations of things that are not working right in our infrastructure. Because we don't necessarily think about the ongoing bits of stuff we need. Instead we get distracted by flashy new things. And whether we're thinking about infrastructure or old technology, it reminds us of all the work that keeps the world going every day. The central fact of our very industrial civilization is labor. It's work. And a lot of that labor falls into maintenance. It's not innovation labor. Innovators and inventors are a tiny slice of the world. Maybe 1%. So we need to think about maintenance distribution as well. And another important part of technological labor is the people who are using the product. They are also laboring. It's quite different from the labor we see elsewhere.

So a quick spin through a variety of things that we need to maintain today. Because nothing comes without its world. This is from Donna Haraway. No object comes without the need to maintain it. We need to think about the life cycle of the object. Some objects you might think about. Community spaces such as makerspaces. This is Cambridge Makespace. Community assets. Think about benches. Someone has to look after them to keep them maintained, keep them working. Communities themselves need maintenance. Online or offline. People don't just thrive together without some effort. For example, Reddit moderators play a huge role -- we can debate how well they do it in different subreddits, but it's labor that needs to be done. Open Source needs maintenance too. I've picked SSL as a classic example where there weren't many people maintaining it, and we didn't realize it, until everything went wrong with Heartbleed. Someone has to look after this stuff. Standards.

Something else you might think doesn't need maintaining. We tend to think about tech standards, but there's also small standards that come in every parts of our lives. The standard sizes for screws or for envelopes that we've got here. And standards are critical. They help us have confidence in the world around us for food or goods or whatever. The internet. I just put it here, because it's a really big question. Who maintains the internet? And if we followed an internet packet from my phone all the way to my friend's phone in Australia, think of all the systems it goes through. And what systems -- what labor is being used to maintain all of those different stages all the way through that we're so dependent on. Stuff like Wikipedia. A lot of maintenance goes into this. Both looking after the content and keeping it organized so people can find it. And of course, infrastructure, which we've talked about. It's easy to assume in a rich country like the UK or America that infrastructure maintenance just happens.

But if you think about the potholes you've probably encountered in your world, they're pretty bad in the UK. And in the US, infrastructure is in a really bad state right now. The American society of civil engineers has recently said that 17% of American dams -- and you know that dams are a pretty big and important bit of infrastructure -- are high hazard potential due to neglect of maintenance in those dams. Even in our developed, rich Western economies, we're not looking after our infrastructure very well. So a few random thoughts on maintenance. Who maintains stuff? Probably more people than you think. In the computer industry, there's a bit of research, which was presented at the maintainers' conference in America that software maintenance can account for up to 60% of the total software costs, and 70% of engineers were actually maintaining things rather than designing new ones. Maintenance can be blue collar. We can think of mechanics and plumbers and janitors and electricians. But it can also be white collar like the IT crowd or white jacket, like dentists. Dentists are maintainers. And our obsession with technological novelty tends to hide all of these other forms of labor away, including things like housework. Women disproportionately keep life on track for most of us, and domestic labor has huge financial implications, but is very rarely counted in how we think about how the economy works.

So in 1983, Ruth Schwartz Cowan in her book New Work for Mother talks about how vacuum machines and washing machines actually fitted into women's ceaseless labor in the home. One of her findings was that one of these housekeeping machines increased women's labor, because the idea of what type of cleanliness was acceptable increased. So they weren't saving labor at all. Who pays for maintenance? In Open Source, until recently, the answer was nobody. It's being done by volunteers around the edges. But maintenance is also big business. If you're a big engineering company like General Electric or Boeing, you're making heavy investment for maintaining the systems that you use, because breakdown means huge loss of income. Even in digital industries, companies like Amazon and Netflix are actually doing a lot of maintenance as well, because customers are only happy when everything is working. So you need to maintain before it breaks rather than repairing afterwards.

But it's tough to find business models for that, given our focus on making things and selling them. Here is a book called the true cost of maintenance. In places where you maintain stuff, if it goes wrong, maintenance can often look like a burden. It's a cost. It's not something that you really want to do. And the traditional approach of management is to try to trim that cost down. We maintain things at different times. When we pause in their use, we might maintain something on a regular cycle, like we service our car every year, or we maintain stuff when it breaks. Quite different types of maintenance timing. And how we learn to maintain is interesting too. Young fathers in America used to be trained on maintenance, how to look after equipment as part of training as a father. And home economics used to teach how to repair stoves and fridges, but we seem to have forgotten that. As we said earlier, things are maintained more in poorer places or where the supply chain is limited, so you don't have a choice.

This is a session from the maintainers' academic conference in the States, which I liked, showing the cycles or the different kinds of maintenance that are interconnected. In this case in the world of elevators. Cost of maintenance, it's quite a lot. It's good. I'm gonna spin through this. And maintenance being safety-critical is interesting. This is a study of mining safety, which found that the maintainers themselves are most at risk. Those doing the work. So I just wanted to share this. Juris is an ethnographer. This ontology can start to make us think that maintainers are other and inferior. But maintainers have a rich culture and value in what they do, which is worth thinking about. One of my favorite examples is from Cambridge. We have a guerilla groundsman who goes around repairing benches, maintaining road signs. He's anonymous because his work is semi-legal. I assume it's a he. He's gonna be talking at my event shortly. It's a cool thing to do. And digital maintenance. This is your classic XKCD. If we don't maintain our digital assets, we can lose them forever, which is perhaps unexpected.

And finally, you can't actually necessarily maintain things forever either. Fairphone is not gonna be maintaining Fairphone 1, because it's gonna be impossible after a certain point. There are ideas about whether we should talk in advance about when to stop maintaining things, putting expiry dates on internet of things products. I'll sprint through this super quickly. New business models like leasing is really helpful, and crowd funding can also be a way of looking after things. This is leasing jeans. It's part of a circular economy business. Makerspaces make it easier to look after stuff. We've got greater access to tools as well. Tool libraries. The average power drill in the UK is used for an average of 30 minutes in its entire lifetime. We really don't need our own power drills. It makes sense instead to loan tools, which gives more access to people. The internet gives access to parts, for information on how to maintain things as well, and it helps us coordinate. This is another example from Liverpool, where they have a system on GitHub that helps coordinate maintenance of the space. So what is next?

There are many amazing individuals and projects that are trying to maintain, repair, reuse, and sustain all parts of our world. They're in the public sector, the private sector, volunteers, in co-ops, and collectives. And too often, they're invisible. As you're going about your world, think about who is maintaining it and whether or not you can help them or recognize them or even just say thank you for the maintenance work that's making your life easier. I think this is a quote from Lee Vinsel, who set up the maintainers' conference in America. Innovation speak worships at this altar of change, but why are we changing things? Thinking about maintenance helps us think instead about questions where we can think about what we want out of the technologies and the things we're making. What kind of society do we want to live in? So I'm organizing a festival of maintenance. It's on the 22nd of September and it's going to be a celebration of those who maintain different parts of our world and how they do it. Recognizing this often hidden work of maintenance, of stewardship, of custodianship, of tending the things that matter.

It's a whole day full of short talks and debates, with a diverse range of maintainers, community managers, repairers, stewards, the people who look after things. We've got the guerilla groundsman coming. I don't know who he is, but I have faith he's gonna show up and talk anonymously. We've got folks talking about digital maintenance, building facilities maintenance, people comparing innovation and maintenance way more competently than me. All sorts of things. It's gonna be really lively. So do check it out. There's lots of information online. We've got a couple more speakers still to announce, and tickets are just 12 pounds at the moment. Because we want to make sure this is an event that's accessible to the kinds of people that do work in maintenance. So do come along and join us. Hopefully this will be part of an ongoing dialogue, where we can start to think more about the role of maintenance in our world, as well as making. Because making is cool too, but maintaining stuff is important, and we should try to say thanks a bit more often to those who maintain our world. Thank you all!

(applause)

>> Thank you very much! I need a guerilla groundsman for my garden because the current groundsman is just not cutting. Any questions?

>> You have no idea how bright it is up here. You're just a wall of light.

>> Where is the festival of maintenance going to be held?

>> UCL, Bloomsbury sort of area. It's going to be a super informal day. Really chill. So do come along. 

>> Any more?

>> You're such a good audience. Sticking out late on a Sunday.

>> This feels very virtuous coming to this talk at all, when they could just be in the bar.

>> We know most of these people are maintainers. So they're all obviously interested. Cool.

>> If you have nothing more... Reminders...


