Live captioning by @stenoknight for White Coat Captioning @whitecoatcapxg, whitecoatcaptioning.com, and sponsored by Nexmo

>> I'll start by introducing us. I'm Leon Trimble, a digital artist from Birmingham, currently based at the Pervasive Media Studio in Bristol, and the Steam House in Birmingham, and I run the dome, which is just about 100 meters that way. So we've been doing some modular synthesizer visuals and music jams all day. And into the wee hours every night. Come and see us tonight. I think we're on 'til midnight. So I have been hacking lots of devices and gaming technology and stuff for years, to make visuals and music. And it's kind of a convoluted story. But we're here to talk about the Gravity Synth today, which is a laser interferometer, which is an instrument for detecting vibrations. And on a massive scale, they detect gravitational waves. Connor is gonna give you a slide show presentation of how the University of Birmingham and the LIGO team at MIT have been detecting gravitational waves over the past few years, and then I'll go on to describe the instrument we've made with a synthesizer, and how that makes crazy noises we can take out and perform with. So the performances in the dome have been put on by a group of different friends. We got asked by EMF to bring the dome after being recommended by the Live Code Musicians who were here last year. The Algorave guys. Ironically, they've got their own festival happening this weekend in Leeds, so none of them could come and perform. So that was a real shame!

I'll let Connor take over.

>> Yeah. Hi, everyone. So just like Leon said, I'm Connor, I'm a PhD student at the University of Birmingham, working on gravity. I'm gonna introduce the science behind the gravity synth. So I'll just give you an introduction to it. It kind of started as collaboration between our research group and Birmingham with Leon. The idea was to use science to produce a synthesizer. More specifically using an interferometer to generate sound. Let's see. Hopefully this will work. Can you hear that? Oh, well. No sound. Ultimately all this is... It's just we're using an interferometer to generate waves, which can then be manipulated, just like any synthesizer.

>> This was the early days in the lab underneath the physics building at the University of Birmingham. And this was an early model of the synth. We've got a bigger and better model on show in the dome.

>> Yeah. So sorry... No sound for the videos. But yeah. Like Leon said, that's when we were playing with it in the lab. So move on to the science. Why is gravity important? Well, up until a few years ago, everything we saw in the universe, everything we observed, was from light. So electromagnetic radiation. But... You know, the matter which manipulates light only makes up about 5%, 6% of the whole universe. So we're actually blind to the majority of things out there. Specifically dark energy and dark matter. We can't see a thing with it. So while we get lovely images like this from telescopes from electromagnetic radiation, we're actually missing a lot of stuff out there. This is Centaurus A. So how can we look at the things that doesn't give out light, that doesn't reflect and refract light? Well, rather than looking at the universe, we can try and listen to the universe. And this is where gravity comes in.

So just a bit of background in gravity. So our idea of gravity was first formally put down by Galileo. He did a lot of experiments. Dropping things from towers, rolling things down inclines. And he found that under the influence of gravity, everything falls -- should fall at the same acceleration. The acceleration due to local gravity. So if you drop a feather and a hammer in a vacuum, they should fall at the exact same rate. So you can't hear it, but this was the Apollo 15 mission, where they tested this experiment on the moon. They dropped a feather and a hammer. You'll see in a second that they do indeed fall at the same rate. Now, of course, we've done these experiments on earth far more precisely than someone just dropping them by hand. It is indeed true. Galileo was right. Things do fall the same under gravity. The reason you don't see this -- if you drop a feather and a hammer right now, of course the feather would drop more slowly. That's because of aerodynamic drag and air resistance. If you take it away, they do fall at the same rate. There we go. And after Galileo, Newton came about. He formulated gravity into actual equations that we can use and manipulate. And these equations can predict the motions of the stars and the planets. But these equations do break down. They can't predict precisely the orbit of Mercury, and action at a distance as well assumes that gravity is everywhere. That information travels faster than the speed of light, which is of course impossible. In the presence of strong gravitational fields, Newton's theory breaks down.

So then we get on to -- okay, so after Newton, we get Einstein. In 1915, 1916, he publicized his theory of general relativity. Rather than thinking of it as a distinct formal force, action at a distance, he said matter curves space time. The curvature of space time -- that's what gives you gravity. This floating diagram here. You can imagine it as being a uniform cuboid. If you put the star at the center, space time curves towards it. That's what gravity is. It's a curve toward space time. We get a lot of interest in things predicted from general relativity. It predicts the existence of black holes and gravitational waves and other things as well, like time dilation. It also allows us to accurately predict the difference between reference frames. So without general relativity, you wouldn't have a system of satellites around the earth. Global communications would not be possible without a theory of general relativity.

So the thing that we're interested in is gravitational waves. And these are... If gravity is the influence of the curvature of space time, gravitational waves are ripples in the space time. And they're caused by any mass that accelerates, any asymmetric mass that accelerates. But of course, everyday objects including ourselves -- the gravitational waves we produce are unimaginably small, even by scientific standards. We have to look at the waves emitted from the largest objects in the universe, interacting in some of the most violent processes you can imagine. So in general, gravitational waves are quite hard to measure. And to give you an idea of how a gravitational wave influences space time, unlike sound waves, which are longitudinal, gravitational waves are transverse. So if you can imagine, on this little map here, I'll explain what the shape is in a minute, but if you can imagine a gravitational wave passing either into or directly out of the screen, it affects space time like this. So it stretches and squeezes space time. Now, of course, it's not as drastic an effect as this. Unfortunately. It would be much easier to measure if it was. So that's what a gravitational wave does. It stretches and squeezes space time in orthogonal directions to the way it travels. And this L shape here you see on the map -- this is one of the interferometers at LIGO. I'll explain about that in a second.

So this L shape -- how it works, it uses laser light of a single frequency. And the laser light shines on a mirror, a beam splitter, which splits it 50/50 and directs it towards two mirrors. And as it does, you see this wave pattern splitting off. It goes to the mirrors, it comes back, and when it comes back to the mirror, it's directed towards a photodiode. These waves can interfere with each other, either constructively or deconstructively, depending on whether they're in phase or not. And what determines the phase is the relative length of these two arms. If they're the exact same length, you'll get constructive interference. If it's slightly off, you'll get deconstructive interference. As the gravitational wave passes through, it stretches and squeezes space time, and we get the relative change in length of these arms.

So that's how you get these bright and dark patterns. As the gravitational wave passes through, you'll see a pattern of light and dark. So this little diode would look like a sinusoid. And from a scientific point of view, why do we do this? Well, like I said earlier, it's the only way to directly observe things like black holes and also neutron stars. These are artistic interpretations. But we've made a few detections now, over the past few years. The most recent one was quite interesting, the first detection of neutron stars colliding. We had the first direct proof that heavy elements like gold were made in these interactions. Before, that was just theory, but now we know where all the heavy elements on earth -- gold and things like that -- they're all made by colliding neutron stars. So just before I go back to the sound of gravitational waves in the gravity sense, I'll just show you a little cool clip. So this is a simulation of the very first detection. Which was two black holes spiraling, and eventually they collided. And this spiral has been going on for millions of years, but the gravitational waves were strong enough that we only caught the last minute or so, at the end of this process. So I'll just play this little simulation. So here we see two black holes spiraling into one another. This color pattern are the gravitational waves spiraling off, and this is the signal pattern from the interferometer. These were over ten times the mass of the sun, and at this point, they will be moving more than half the speed of light. So this is an incredibly violent process. You wouldn't want to be anywhere near here right now. So then they collide and then you see the ring down at the end. So you see these ripples spreading out. That's distortions in space time. The gravitational waves from this event. This was interesting. It was the first direct detection of black holes. Also the first, like I said, the first gravitational wave. So we ticked off a lot of boxes there of things we did for the first time. I'll just move on finally to the sound of gravitational waves.

Like I said, they're just like sound waves, and as such, we can manipulate them to produce... Such that we can actually hear them. The interesting thing at LIGO is that the frequency of these gravitational waves, they're actually in the audible region. You can hear these in the right situations. Of course, their amplitude is so small... I mean, you would never actually hear it with your own ears. But all we need to do is turn up the volume and you hear it. Unfortunately I don't have any sound for this video. But towards the end, as they collide, you hear a little sound. Unfortunately I can't play it. Anyway, it's a long sort of drone, and all of a sudden, towards the end, right here, there's a little chirp.

>> I can play that afterwards. I can get a YouTube of that.

>> Yeah, we've got more videos after. Anyway... But like I said, gravitational waves are just like sound waves. They're transverse rather than longitudinal. So when I say sound waves are longitudinal, as they travel along, they compress and stretch the air in the direction they travel. But gravitational waves are just the same. They have a frequency which gives us a pitch, and from the output of our interferometer, they have a definite shape, which gives us a tone. The actual feel of the sound. And all we need to do is take the output from a photodiode from this and make an interferometer and hook it up to a synthesizer, and there you go. So I'll leave it there. And just before I bring Leon back in, he'll actually show you some cool videos about how this actually sounds. But I'll just finish by saying: Feel free to check out our group website. We've got a lot of information, gravitational waves and the stuff I've done with Leon. A lot of cool apps and games as well. So yeah, thanks.

(applause)

>> Right. So I attended... I was at Birmingham Open Media Studio for a while. And I had... There was a kind of impact for science engagement, kind of meeting. That happened. And I sat next to one of the other researchers from the gravitational wave department. Called Hannah Middleton. I said I was doing audio-visual art, and she said: When black holes collide, they make chirp sounds! And I was like... Wow! My mind is blown. And we just started hanging out. And we didn't even tell the people who had organized the engagement kind of seminar 'til probably 3 months later. We were just sort of... I was going to the lab and chatting, to see what they were doing. And we've become really good friends, actually. Hannah has now moved to Australia. I did Shambala Festival last week. We had Aaron Jones, who has helped build a lot of stuff, along with Connor, in the lab. And Connor is here for this event. And so... We're having loads of fun sort of hanging out.

And I started building a modular synthesizer. To make some noise with it. And what I was gonna do originally was try and get the interferometer to modulate the synthesizer. But what it turned out was that like he says, the sort of vibrations are in the audio kind of region. So I ended up using the modular synthesizer and the low frequency oscillators to modulate that, and use that as the voice. It's become this amazing voice. We've got it over there. We're just tinkering with it. So there you go. The whole of the millions of years of gravitational... Of black holes colliding, at that point, makes a chirp. That quick. But rather than use the sounds, the digital samples of that, a lot of artists use digital data after the fact. For making art. And sonifying data from CERN and what have you. I really wanted to use it as an instrument. I wanted a live performance. Because everything I do is live, because I like the chaos that that kind of entails.

And this is the chaos we've got in the dome. Everybody's been playing live all day, and into the evening. So there's a certain chaos. But out of that comes some real order. So I wanted to use the actual interferometer as this instrument! So we've done a few performances now. The next of which is actually at Newton's house, Woolsthorpe Manor, where the apple tree... Or the reported apple tree... There are different stories as to whether or not there was really an apple, but the real apple tree from the real story -- it really is a story -- is there. So we'll be playing there in a couple of weeks. It's really exciting. So this was at the Future Sessions in Manchester, the Future Everything Festival. And Connor and Aaron came and talked at that. And my girlfriend has been brought into the project. She's a PhD student in digital animation at Plymouth University. So she's got gravitational... Not gravitational wave... Yeah. She's got gravitational wave data and colliding neutron star kind of data. She's kind of animated it. So we've got this lovely kind of stuff. And these lovely spang noises that come along. The actual voice of the interferometer.

(low droning noise)

>> They're coming. There! That's the interferometer! So I'll keep that playing and turn the volume down a little bit. So... There's a lot of information flying around the system. There's the visuals that get OSC via a wireless router built into the modular. And I'm hitting the Michelson interferometer, and it's a local one. Gravitational waves won't really register on this one. But I'm also sending, like, LFO kick drum patterns through a solenoid that is attached to the interferometer, that sends out the patterns later on. So when the beats come in, and this video is incomplete -- it's not the whole set -- and we've got that going later... In the dome, if you want to come and look. And so it all kind of -- it's a living, breathing system. And then what the plan is -- and we almost did it at the Luna Festival, in the Journey to Newtopia. But they put us on too early to do the visuals. So we're putting the visuals in the 360 degree space, in the kind of planetarium feel of a kind of performance. And I think -- just talking about the Chromatouch Dome here. We've got the gravity synth. The plans for the dome next are to put this into 360 degrees, and to take it on tour next year. And the tour is gonna go around the science festivals. It's gonna do a bit of rural touring to places with village greens. We can put the dome up. And all the kind of art centers on campus, around the place. And there's gonna be a whole program of people using science and research for live performance.

People like Graham Dunning and his Mechanical Techno. We've got a bit of that. Here we go. He comes up. So he's gone viral. And this amazing thing where he builds a whole system of mechanical objects that are driven by turntables. And hacked records. So he uses metal contacts here to... Create some lovely stuff. So yeah. And he gets this lovely state where the whole thing is driven just by the kinetics of the turntable. I've also been talking to Vicky Clark, who's got a lovely kind of materiality blog about all the stuff you can do with physics and materials. Okay. Has it got a link to it? It's just... Okay. So basically we've got a synth running later and everybody is plugged into everybody else. So we'll be showing that. And we'll be... Here we go. Materiality. Also I've been talking to Professor Alice Roberts about turning the dome into a big heart. So that's where we're gonna go with everything. I think we're kind of out of time. Are there any questions? Yeah. Five minutes for questions.

>> Any questions? I can't see any hands. Oh, there we are.

>> Yeah. Sorry. I may have missed it. But did you say anything about the interferometer itself? How big it? What is it made of? Can I make one? Can I play one?

>> We've got one there. You can come see.

>> Did you make it?

>> It was made in the labs with Connor and Aaron.

>> Cool.

>> And it's a desktop interferometer, about so big. And it's like... Like a laser pen sized laser in it, with a small beam splitter. And an optic diode that picks that up, and then we amplify that into a series of modular kind of mixer bits. One we can send the solenoid to vibrate it. And two, read it back into a resonator. So that we can then give it melody. Because you can give volt per octave pattern of notes in key. To the resonated sound from that. So you can actually then give it a melody kind of pattern as well. And then that goes into a lovely kind of granular kind of synthesizer, that then sort of spangles it about and spreads it across the stereo field. So it actually becomes a synthesizer, rather than just a percussion instrument. But it does do these lovely percussion sounds. And it's all in a light case. Very portable. Yeah.

>> Any more?

>> Sorry. Just to add onto that, the technical side of it, yeah. The one we have over in a tent, which you can look at -- that is quite professionally done. It would be quite difficult to make that. But at Birmingham, we are working on a way to get a more sort of general, easily assembled one, that's fairly cheap. The one for there -- the mirrors -- to get really good sounds and visual quality, you really need quite expensive mirrors. A proper beam splitter will be a few grand. But of course, that's if you want really research-grade. We are working on having almost like Lego-type builds, where you get just cheap mirrors and that little laser pen. We actually built that with Lego. But if you look on the website, you'll see information about that. But yeah, the one we've got for there -- like he said, it's quite small. Tabletop. About 10, 15 centimeters. For those of you who don't know, the ones that detect the gravitational waves at LIGO, they're 4 kilometer. So they're a bit more difficult to make.

>> 16 with mirrors.

>> Oh yeah. The tunnels themselves are 4 kilometers, but the power is recycled, so I believe the total path length of the light is about 16 kilometers.

>> Yeah, so they're in vacuums as well and they're suspended by glass wires. So that there's no electrons that will vibrate them. And it becomes so small a measurement that it's almost quantum mechanics, because it's like... Almost imperceptible. This is why there are two facilities. It's Hanford and Livingston, in different states. So they've both got to go off for it to work. And there's now VIRGO in Italy. So they are expanding. Yeah.

>> Okay. Everybody, big round of applause for Leon and Connor!

(applause)

Thank you very much. Thank you. Just a little reminder that EMF is entirely run by volunteers, so if you're having a nice time at the festival, please consider donating your time back to help it run. I think we basically need people to do everything this afternoon. Another round of applause for these guys.

(applause)


