      Numbers vs Resources:  The History of Banking
       
      Patrick O'Connell
      
      >> Hello?  Guess not.
      >> Hello.  Welcome to stage B.  I'm your announcements volunteer, and the people doing the audio and video recording in here are also volunteers.  People at the bar are volunteers.  This entire event is run by volunteers.  I would like you to sign up for more volunteers, if you would like to help out with heralding, announcements as I'm doing, bar or AV or anything you need to do on site, you are welcome to come to the green room and sign up there.  If you have filled out the online form and haven't heard from us, please go to the green room and speak to the volunteer team.
      There's a couple more announcements.  First, there will be a swap shop in the Cy Bar tonight.  Over there, you can bring your unwanted tech stuff and leave other people's tech stuff.  Sounds like a fun thing to do.
      Secondly, there will be a crappy robots contest at 7 p.m. tonight outside the bar behind me.  You can sign up at the info tent.  Hebocon, the crappy robots contest.  I would like to hear your feedback about your feedback.  Go to EMFcamp.org/feedback.  You can fill out the form anonymously or leave your name.  Okay.  So, without further ado, I would like to introduce Patrick O'Connell.  Soon to be doctor.  The title of his talk is numbers versus resources, the history of banking.  Thank you.
      PATRICK: Hello.  Hey, hey, thanks for coming out.  It's soon to be doctor is a slight exaggeration.  But this is nothing to do with my thesis.  You'll be happy to know.  This is based on some earlier work I did which was much less rigorous, but much more interesting.  That's the way academia tends to go.  Maybe I should explain the title, then.
      Numbers versus resources.  Or I wish it were a conspiracy, but I'm afraid it's much worse than that.  You may have the impression, I think a lot of people do these days, that we're on a kind of train to oblivion in terms of the global economy.  It just keeps on growing and growing in all conceivable directions and nobody seems to have any power to actually affect its progress or stop it.  And that leads, I think, to a lot of people having or resorting to the idea that the economy is under the control of a secret cabal of  that the world's history is under a secret cabal of people who are pulling the strings from the shadows.  That's a comforting theory.  Because if it were true, we could kill the queen or whatever other lizards are available and it would be fixed.  And we could have a sustainable environment and not live in a world where everything is taken over by corporate interests and the surveillance state wasn't happening that don't seem to be subject to any kind of democratic or other forms of power.  They're all just happening.
      I became interested in this from a certain perspective when I started reading a book which I don't have with me called go Left Back by Hofstetter, I don't know if you have heard of it.  It's a really interesting book.  I think everybody here should definitely read.  And some of the concepts in it that he uses are listed here.  Recursive equations, which he shows how interesting they can be.  Isomorphisms being ways to create an alternative way of describing something.  Or differing ways to look  things that could be analogized to each other could be said to be isomorphic.  If you said that a virus has an iOSs to a selfassembling machine, that would be an example.  So, sort of like energy, something like that.  And chunking, this is the most important thing.  This gave me a renewed faith in the powers of the historian when he talked about chunking.
      Which is, it depends what scale you're looking on something how you analyze it and how much you can get out of the thing you're looking at.  If you're looking at the life cycle of an animal, you might not look at minutiae of its individual cells or even its daytoday activities if it was a longlived animal.  You would look at certain things, reoccurring trends and you would get more information out of a large scale than looking at the tiny component parts.  The same thing is true of human society.
      In some ways we become more predictable as you scale up.  One human can do all sorts of crazy things in a given day.  But a whole bunch of humans together, if you have enough of them, tend to follow more certain and more  not predictable  it's the wrong word  but sort of more open to analysis on the parts.  And so, one big chunk which I've taken an interest in is this process which is happened to the economy.  The global economy.
      As you see, I've written this from a linear to an exponential tendency.  What we have early on in our history is a linear growth in the economy.  And at some point, between, you know, roughly the 13th century and the 16th, 17th century, we go into a completely different mode where the economy is suddenly running away from us and dragging everything along with it.  And, of course, this is a dialectic process.  New technologies are discovered, new resources are discovered, the economy grows it further, so on and so forth.  Suddenly it's happening in a way which it never did in the whole of human history.  Remember, human history is going back further than this graph illustrates.  Back thousands and thousands and thousands of years.  In all that time, there was a linear tendency to the economy.
      So, what's happened recently in history is actually a really amazing event which is a little underappreciated.  Amazing, but also terrifying.  This is the population of the Earth.  And as you can see, again, the linear tendency  actually, in fairness, this is a log scale.  So, it's not precisely linear before we get to this late period.  It is slightly an exponential curve.  And that's the discovery of agriculture, what you're seeing there.
      I'm pointing at my thing, but you're looking at the bits between 4000 and 0, this is the period where agriculture is being discovered.  It's still a relatively linear tendency.  What we move into after, let's say sort of what?  1200, 1300, 1400, depending where you put it is an exponential tendency which means that we have a population of the world of maybe less than 200 million in 0 A.D.  In 1400 or 1300 A.D., it's less than 2 billion, but now it's 7 billion.  It can't be sustained in terms of the Earth's carrying capacity.  We're hurtling towards something.  It's an out of control economic freight train.  There are good results and bad ones.   The reason the population has gone up is the extraordinary advances of medicine and technology that have been discovered through this process of economic growth.
      Now, the question is, what's driving this?  And obviously if you're Karl Marx, you look at this period after 1500 and you say, well, obviously everyone's read Karl Marx.  Here we have industrialization.  So, industrialization is this key for the change from a linear to an exponential tendency in the population and all these other ways.  But if you look earlier on this grab, you can see that actually there's a little mini version.  Maybe I have to come around and sort of point this out.
      There's a little mini version here of what happens here.  You see a little spike; a little attack sustain decay which happens between let's say 1250 and let's say sort of 1350.
      And I became very interested in this because that happened to be a period in which the economy was financializing.  In a very revolutionary way.  Not the economy of the whole world.  Just the economy of a very small fraction of the world.  And that fraction was Italy, and secondarily, western Europe, which were small compared to other places in the world.  And they had this extraordinary takeoff, which is reflected in what happened later on after the Industrial Revolution.  And this was led by banks and lending and profitable lending.
      Now, something else big changed in that time.  This is olden times, not to be too technical with you.  Olden times.  There was  money was gold or other precious metals and the amount of money was obviously less than the total amount of wealth which represented all sorts of things that could have a value.  Money, in other words, was just one piece of the economy.  What's happened between olden times and nowadays, not to get too technical with you, is money has grown and assets and liabilities which now money is, outstrip wealth.  There's more assets and liabilities in the world than there is wealth.  So, in other words the creation of money has led this process of exponential growth.  First comes the money, then comes the  well, I won't bother with the rest of the quote because it's a bit rude.  Yeah.
      So, the financial process is a recursive exponential process.  And so, you can see here, you know, you're adding to  if you start lending out money for  to make a return on a compound interest rate, what you get is an exponential process of accumulation which is obviously not linear.  And so, what I wondered is this a coincidence?  I came to the conclusion that it is very much not a coincidence that in these periods, first this one in the 13th century, and later the later one, that financialization of the economy was a very big part of what was happening.  On a local scale in the 13th century and on a global scale later on.  Behold, our demonic lord.
      This is the  I mean  I could analogize this to the story of Faust.  I don't know if anyone is familiar or how much you're familiar with Faust and Mephistopheles.  Faust is visited by a demon.  And the demon offers him incredible power and wealth and treasures.  But time he leads him in this dance towards the loss of his soul.
      And lending  profitable lending has a kind of similar effect.  When somebody comes to you and suddenly offers you the opportunity to have a massive amount more money than you did before, all sorts of possibilities open up.  So, you might be the King of England and you might decide to get a much, much bigger army and invade France.  Which you never thought of doing before because France is huge, and England is small.  Now you can.  Or you might have Leonardo da Vinci create catapults.  All this is possible, but at the end of the process, you have to return more money than what you borrowed in the first place.  This is why I say this is more like the second line.  YN plus question mark, which is human ingenuity.  The ability to leverage whatever powers you have to get more money than you had  next than you had last year.  Not just the same amount as you would do if you were just doing common agriculture.
      And this human ingenuity is teased out by the process of offering loans to powerful people.  And so, this is what the  a geometric representation of this sequence looks like.  It's Fibonacciish.  There's something profound and powerful about it.  And in each one, there's sort of isomorphism.  In each stage it's a bigger, more elaborate version of the previous stage.  Right now, I'm going to blow your mind.  Here's a world map.  And here's a Fibonacci sequence on a world map.
      And, I mean, all right.  Some of you, the historically educated among you may say this is completely inaccurate.  True.  But.  It is roughly illustrative of the process that happened, financial power spread out from Europe into the rest of the world.  First from the 11th century to the 13th century into Northern Europe from Southern Europe and the Mediterranean as you can see there.  And later and roughly into these other periods.  It's not exactly right.  But it's more or less.
      But the bit that I'm interested in is this 10501250 range.  Which is the microcosm, you see, or the isomorphism of what's happening now in the modern world economy or what has happened since the 17th century.
      So, the church had an idea that there was something wrong with this  with this concept.  They called it usury.  This is the idea of lending money for compound interest.  They said if you lend money for compound interest, you describe it, and they did in Italy already by the 11th century, as putting your money to work.  And what the church said, quite fairly, you're not putting your money to work.  You're putting someone else to work because your money is not going to make more money all on its own.  It requires a degree of exploitation.  A degree of going beyond and compromising with what you were doing before and changing how you did things in a way that the church wasn't comfortable with because the church is all about tradition.
      It ain't natural, they said.  This red line is what a farmer does.  This red line is what we were doing collectively for thousands and thousands of years.  The blue line and the green line are the lines that pop up when you start to bring usury into the equation.  So, well, we say, certainly we can't be controlled by an equation.  This is ridiculous.  Unlimited variability and unpredictably of human behavior.  And the behavior of powerful people.  The world historically has always been ruled over by despots, actually, up until recently.  And those despots can be flighty.  We have all seen Trump in action.  Sometimes they take it upon themselves that they don't want to pay their creditors.  Instead they want to arrest their creditors and kill them all.  That was a process that set back this system and prevented it from ever reaching its exponential potential, let's say, or its logical conclusion.
      So, the answer is no.  Except under very, very specific historical circumstances.  And so, the example that we're going to give is the circumstances of medieval Italy and Western Europe which is a much simpler, in a way, example, than what we're experiencing now which is happening on a global scale and it's incredibly, incredibly complicated.  Not least because now money has stopped being a real thing.  We're no longer taking money and putting it into the economy.  We're creating money and we're dragging the economy along with it.  What they were doing in medieval Italy, they were unlocking stored wealth.  All these people who had a bit of money hidden under the bed or in a chest in a field could pull it out and put it into this system which was to lend it out and get back more.  Or they were induced to pull it out and put it into the system by the fact that they had taken out loans and they couldn't afford to pay them back.
      Now, this is the geography that gives us the specific historical circumstances.  So, we can see Italy here is an isolated from the rest of Europe by the Alps in the north and obviously the sea all around it.  And this gave the Italian citystates the opportunity to develop their banking system, which was in contact with the rest of Europe relatively free from reprisals from the kings and so forth that they were getting involved in.
      And so, in Italy what happened was that it was a very, let's say, active urban class.  And they were merchants, yes, pirates, certainly.  And also, you know, very, very astute people.  And they took over the city governments of the Italian citystates, these merchants.  And basically, sat at the apex of society.  And so, they ensured that the process by which this  this equation took hold would remain in force because the rulers had no interest in interrupting the process.  They were the biggest debt holders.  So, the rulers of the Italian economies like Florence and Venice and other places had massive investments in the state debt of their own  of their own societies.
      And so, in Venice, they called it the old mountain, which was a gigantic state debt that everybody in Venice was invested in, but the rich people were most invested in it.  There were no prospects where the money lenders were isolated from the true powerful people, the kings and so forth.  That this power is interrupted.  And they were able to gestate it and bring it to real sophistication in Italy by the 12th century, or the 13th century depending how you look at it.  This guy was involved.  He's the Pope.
      And there he is.  Pope Gregory IX with a task hat and a cloak, surrounded by people.  Where did he get the money for this stuff? in the longterm, he got the money from the churches.  That is to say the Popes had a network of churches around Europe and over the course of the 12th and 13th century, they learned very well how to extort the maximum possible profit from their network of churches which they never thought of doing before that.  In the shortterm, he got the money from these guys in the corner.  You can see we have like the priestly hats on the lefthand side, and then a couple of monks either side of him.  And then these guys in the corner who have no priest hat and no monk baldy patch.  These are the Italian bankers who were resident in the papal court by the 13th century.  So, they were the once providing the Pope with all of the immediate income he needed to build his vast palaces, to have his lovely cloaks, you know.  This is what they looked like before.  They weren't much of anything.  You know what I mean?  They were just doing masses and stuff.
      And then, of course, by the 13th century, they're looking like this, you know?  And this is  and this is the exponential effects that you can see happening.
      [ Laughter ]
      You know, they had to get the money from somewhere.  So, they found a way.  I mean, they were going round Europe occasionally taking gifts from their local churches.  And then what they did was they  they started to make annual demands for these gifts.  And the annual demands for the gifts turned them into a kind of form of regular taxation.  Now, this was the papal tide.  And that taxation became the basis for the loans that they would receive from these Italian bankers.  Because, what is the credit?  They want you to have regular income.  They want you to have collateral.  So, the papacy went from an occasional, you know, collector of money from churches to an incredibly regular almost kind of tyrannical collector of money from all of the churches around Europe in order to satisfy the demands that they had created themselves by asking for these loans.  They didn't have to get involved in this stuff.  But you can't resist the temptation, Mephistopheles.  So, what happened next?  The Popes converted.  They took a little time to come around to the idea that they should be involving themselves in this system.  If you take the early 12th century.  Get some water.
      You have  well, you can read it.  So  they did not like usury in the early 12th century.  They thought it was awful.  In all forms.  Without exception.  By 1168 they were a little  they weren't quite as sure.  Usury is still bad, but what's worse  what's even worse is not paying up your debts.  Because that's really bad.  And then by the 1179 they this changed the form.  This is where you can see, this was the two councils basically rephrasing the same statement.  They now condemned usari manifesti, that is to say pawnbrokers, people on the street at a small scale.  Not the merchant bankers from the Italian citystates who were lending them their money in a very subtle way.
      By the 1200s it had gone much further.  Now they were bar rowing so much money, why collect the tax and bring it back.  Send the bankers out and let them collect it themselves.  Italian bankers from Florence and Venice and Luca and these other cities were tasked on collecting the Pope's taxes on the pope's behalf.  And this is a big step forward for them.  Now, of course, they have a connection to everywhere in Europe.  The Pope has churches every in where Europe.  They have to travel.
      Sometimes they can't afford to pay their taxes.  Who is there to help them out?  It's the same bankers that help out the Pope.  Now they are to help the local churches with paying the money they owe them.  And, hey, maybe you want a bigger monastery, guys.  Maybe you want a very vast monastery with palatial conditions with and all the things that lead to the Reformation.  But we're not talking about that.  The local churches were against usury.  They excommunicated the local churches, and said the debts were illative.  And pope Gregory IX said hold on, these are my people.  Now we have an international financial regulator and we have like the IMF in papal form.  And his international financial regulations consistent of excommunicating people who mess with bankers.
      This is  this happened.  This is all real.  So, this is the way this spread as well.  The Crusades involved kings in this process.  And so, what you see in the red line that goes around Spain is the journey of the kings of England on the third Crusade.  And subsequent to the third Crusade, they made the same journey again and again and again.  And every time they passed Italy, they would meet the Pope and they would meet his people.  And eventually established a relationship with the Pope's people.  And given all kinds of money.  What about a bigger crusade?  How about twice as big an army as that?  Twice as many boats and so on and so forth.  Actually, this resulted in one of the most incredible facets of any crusade, which is the fourth one we see here.  The orange line.  12021204, ended up destroying Constantinople rather than going after the Muslims.  They owed so much money to the Venetians that they had to pay them back.  The Christians came up with the idea to attack other Christians to get the money back.  There was more money there than in Jerusalem.  And now the King of England has debts.  He has to create new taxes.  Leveraging the power that he has.  These are feudal monarchs, they don't really tax.  And suddenly  and suddenly, you know, they have to come up with ways of doing it.  So, who is there to advise them on how to create taxes?  Well, the very sophisticated merchants help them.  And they have customs and excise.  And they were running the customs and excise on behalf of the King.  They were taking back money they had lent to the king in order to go on crusade.  And more tithes.  The kings collaborate with the churches.  They push everybody further into poverty if they can.  But then people down the social scale being taxed also find if necessary to go and borrow money.
      And so, then you get these little village economies with lenders and debtors and people forfeiting their land to other people on account of debt and a concentration of wealth.  And this is very much that, you know, biblical phrase that he who has will be given a load more.  And to he who hasn't will be taken away even the little bit that he has.  That's the process this is creating.  It's concentrating of wealth.  That concentration of wealth can be very useful.  Very useful for creating technology.  Very useful for advancing society in all kinds of ways.  You can't build a sewer system without a massive concentration of wealth.
      This is not something we should see as evil and always wrong in every conceivable way.  But it is a specific process which came about in this era.  This is Florence.  This is the growth of Florence between the 12th century and the early 14th century.  You can see the walls of the 12th century Florence and the walls of early 14th century Florence.  And this is the same exponential effect that we've seen in our opening graphs happening at a highlylocalized level within the Italian citystates in this period.
      And those are, you know, the profits they were making from throughout Europe.  Okay.  So, all right.  I think I've run out of time.  I'll take questions or if there's no time for questions, meet me in the bar and ask for stuff.  Okay.  Well, I believe I have illustrated the point generally which is that usury has a kind of social effect.  A socioeconomic, political effect.
      It drives people to leverage their power to find more sources of wealth to innovate and  and also to exploit.  And that's the downside.  And the exploitation bit is the part that we're now running scared of.  So, the question is, what do we do about it?  All right.  Here's the population graph again.  This is what should happen, all right?  This is what was happening continuously over the period before this exponential effect took  took hold.  What actually did it for the  for the Italian early phase of this was the Black Death and a number of wars and other things which set this back an awfully long way.
      And in fact, the entire experiment was destroyed when Italy was invaded repeatedly by the King of Spain and the King of France whose armies the Italians had done so much to help develop.  That was the irony of it.  The process does dig its own grave.  And so, this will happen, by hook or by crook.  And the question is, can we take hold of it and make it happen deliberately?  Or will it happen all on its own.  Because if it does, it won't be pleasant.  So, political solution.  Seize the banks.  It's really simple.  I mean, it's really obvious.  If they return everything that they  that they take out of the system straight back into it and if they only loan to people who have been democratically mandated to receive massive amounts of money rather than just to anyone who can make them a massive profit, then we can do a lot to turn this power into something which is good for everybody.
      It doesn't have to be dangerous.  It doesn't have to be awful.  But it does have to be controlled not to be dangerous and awful.  And it's currently not.  All right.  There's a nonpolitical solution.  Some of you may like that better.  I don't know.  I'm not a computer guy.  You all do what you feel.  I'm not encouraging anything.
      [ Laughter ]
      I'm not encouraging anything.  If it's illegal, don't do what you feel.  But, yeah.  Anyway.  So, yeah, that's the end of that.  And thank you very much.
      [ Applause ]
      >> Yep, thank you very much.  Unfortunately, I have to say that we don't have any more time for questions in here.  But you can definitely continue the conversation in the bar.  He will be in the talk right after this talk.  And the bar is behind us.  Thank you.

