      Adventures in somatosensory music, body hacking & beyond
      
      Chemical Adam
      
      >> Test, test, test.  There we go.  Oh, there we go.  Hello, everybody.  Good afternoon I guess it is now.  My name is John Thurmond.  I'm announcing the speakers today.  We are trying to get Chemical Adam set up right now.  So, in the meantime, let me just make a couple announcements.  We need volunteers.  Very badly.  If you are enjoying this venue and the performances you see, they need all kinds of help to make that happen.  I'm a volunteer myself.  I gave a talk this morning on the stage and now I'm volunteering because they really needed the help.  Otherwise there wouldn't be anybody to announce.
      So, please go down to any of the places, green room, volunteer tent, anywhere.  And volunteer.  They need AV recording, to heralding to everything.  If you want to sit and work on your badge, they could use you.  You could just sit there and work on your badge or do whatever you like, have a nice cup of tea or coffee and when things come up, they need runners to go and find people.  Good?  Okay.  Yeah, you're working on sound.  We don't have an AV person at the moment.  The guy running that is running the AV.
      >> I can stay after and do AV if you would like.
      >> Let me ask you all to give a big, big welcome who is here from Wales via Berlin.
      CHEMICAL ADAM: Yes, that's right.  Thank you so much.
      >> I know it's just after lunch  I know it's just after launch.  I'll make sure to throw anything at people who are sleeping after lunch.  But, please, give him your full attention and please go ahead, Chemical Adam.
      CHEMICAL ADAM: Can I just check we have sound from the computer?  We'll know when it sounds terrible.  Oh, there it is.  Just let that build for a moment.
      [terrible sounding music]
      ¶ ¶
      good afternoon, everybody.  Or perhaps good afternoon.  What you're listening to is a piece of what I like to call researchdriven dance music.  Which is music that I create which is often embedded with psychoacoustic tricks.  In this case, it is a combination of what's known as a shepherd glissando, sometimes called the audio basher pole.  It creates the illusion of an infinitely rising tone by changing the timbre and the sound, it is just a short loop that gives the idea that it's infinitely rising.
      
      ¶ ¶
      which is useful in some cases.  For instance, we were doing a generative dance music project for science museums with our friend LJ Rich.  And Annie in the audience here also about creating interactive installations for music where you were performing, but also reacting to a stream of data that you were receiving.  In our case, we were trying to calculate something LJ dubbed the wiggle index.  Taking the accelerometer from the people's phones as they danced while the music was playing.  But we wanted to give people interaction.  If you want to keep getting the stream of the accelerometer data, you have to keep something on the screen touched.
      we needed to give people something to interact with even if the buttons didn't do something.  You could let people vote for when they wanted the drop in the track to kick in.  We had to be give them a build that was infinitely long, theoretically, in case nobody voted for the drop.  And as it happened, the WiFi didn't work, so we never triggered the drop.  So, instead we went to a very round about kind of hand counting method.  Throw your arms in the air when you want the drop.
      And there was one poor chap who end of the BBC segment they made about it who is just pictured in the middle while we just play this infinitely rising tone.  But it turns out the same data you use to create those tones you can use in other interesting ways like creating the delayed sound of reverbs.  And instead of increasing the pitch of something and gradually fading it out and replacing it with a lower one to continue the illusion of it running, you could have a reverb of a space that gets infinitely larger and larger.  It's useful if you do VR, audio in games.  Anything with access to binaural audio or access to the position of the listener's head.  I've been luckily asked to do an artist’s residency at a place that has what they describe as a 4D sound system.  Don't get me started on that name.  But unlike the other surround sound speaker systems I had played on, which usually would be either eight speakers around you or otherwise long, flat planes of speakers in front of or behind you or just a single wall in an XY grid of addressable speaker like our science museum piece, but instead now it has 16 columns of speakers around you in a 4x4 grid with speakers at three heights inside them.  And then subwoofers under the floor.  So, it's 48.9 channel surround.
      And you cannot only move the sounds around you, but also towards and away from you in a way that's very interesting to me to work with.  When I say somatosensory music, as the one of four slides I have prepared, we'll show you.  I'm interested in the physical sensation of sound as much as the acoustic sensation of sound.  From meeting a very interesting character who I think we were first introduced when they asked to use a piece of my music on a SUBPAC commercial.  SUBPAC make wearable subwoofers sometimes used in gaming or other places where you would want some physical sound.  But it turns out they're very useful also for things like drummers and bass players to be able to hear each other and feel the low frequencies for the music when they're being the rhythm section of a band.  But then it turns out that if you are someone who is profoundly deaf and experiences sound only through the physical sensation of it, there's a huge, awesome deaf clubbing scene.  And if you make friends with some of those people, they will know where in town has the best sound system.  So, make friends with those people.
      And at the time I knew this person as a dancer and they then became a choreographer.  And moved from choreographer to thinking, I actually want to pick the music to DJ and then finally you know what?  I actually want to pick everything about the music.  And they're a music producer that's been profoundly deaf since birth and they perform and dance to music they have never heard, and I think that is absolutely amazing.
      But we started to think in response to what Jacob was doing, how would you get over problems like beat matching if you're a DJ and you want to introduce a track in sync with the one that's currently playing?  You might see people slipping one headphone on and off.  Don't have that option if your only perception of sound is through a large speaker system pointed at you.  We were trying to think of ways, including the SUBPAC and other wearable bass transducer devices so people could feel the beat of a track that wasn't currently being played out of that same loud sound system.
      But it turns out that it's pretty difficult to do that in a way that's always perceivable in the way that a loud pair of headphones is.  Like the ones that all the DJs are gradually losing their sense of hearing to.  But it turns out there is a great thing that approximates sound in an interesting way.  It is called transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation.  You may have seen devices like this.  They're marketed for pain relief.  I think they get some kind of use within the BDSM community.
      But they  yeah.  Also, if you see things like an ab belt where it's like, hey, wear this belt and you're going to get a six pack with zero effort.  The way you get that is by it electrocuting you and forcing your muscles to contract.  You still exercise without effort, but it will hurt you.  But it turns out  humans  how many senses do we have?  Share a number out.  There was some numbers close to the right number there.  Also, of course, we're at a hacker convention.  There's probably lots of augmented people here.  I just recently had a magnet implanted into my hand, so I have magneto perception and can feel inside of wires or pick things up or hold tiny screws while repairing something.  But, yeah, so, we have sight, sound, touch, taste, smell, proprioception.  But your electric perception is quite complete.  If you play it into your body.  It feels quite convincingly as if you stood in front of a loud speaker system playing a 200 sound wave at you.  It's quite surreal to put things together.  Binaural beats, playing one frequency in one ear and another frequency in another ear can make the brain waves synchronize and it's sometimes used to induce states of meditation or lucid dreaming.  But you can do that between your senses also using the Ganzfeld effect.  You see people doing things with half a PingPong ball over each eye so you have a uniform field of vision.  And you strobe lights.  Play one frequency to the ears and one to the eyes.  Now instead of going from one hemisphere to your other, they go from the visual to the auditory cortex and make you feel like you're going to fall over.
      So, I was very interested to discover that you can use it to do something that feels like you're playing sound very loudly.  We came across this working on a hack for CTM Festival.  I really don't have Windows NT, by the way.  That's just my desktop background.  Yeah.  We were working as a music hack lab that happens at the club Media in Germany, run by Peter, Create Digital Music.  And we were working on a project for that called we suffer for our arts.  Which was commentary on the difference between performing kind of playbackbased or cliptriggering electronic music or playing a physical instrument.  And the idea that if you have like a tangible emotional connection to a piece of music, it will come out in the way you physically perform it.
      But that doesn't matter if you're just hitting clip triggers.  We set up a device that if you wanted to trig the louder, faster, more intense sections of music, you had to be willing to suffer longer and more powerful electric shocks.  And then taking EMG readings from our bodies to measure the physical sort of intensity with which we were having to fight against the muscle contractions caused by the tennis machine shots.  And the more intensely we were focusing to perform, the more bright and intense the visuals became, blasting white noise at the audience across a large screen so they too could share our pain.  So, I've been doing lots of weird stuff, as you can tell.  Some probably slightly more familyfriendly than others.  As when you get into the  yes, maybe, pop your hands over their ears for a moment.  If you wonder how sound affects people's bodies, and then vibration affecting bodies, there's a whole sex toy route.  And before you know it, maybe you're taking augmented sound art installations such as events and parties, such as the base orgasm machines version 1, 2 and 3.  Free and open source.  You can build one yourself.  Come and talk to me about it later, maybe.
      Because there turned out to be more of a crossover between these different areas than I expected.  If you want to find something that will feel like a physically nice sensation, a good way to prototype that is to find an extremely sensitive part of someone's body and see if it feels nice there.  And you can extrapolate that the patterns where people feel pleasant usually cross to the other.  That's why we start to add those senses together.  So, thinking about accessibility, I was thinking about the nature of AV performances and the other stuff we were doing in this surround sound venue I was speaking about such as sleepover concerts where, is the subwoofers over the floor, you have the opportunity to mildly oscillate people in a way that's interesting to them and encourage them to just sleep, dream there, have a sound track that was played by you.  But at first, I thought it was really strange, but maybe living in Berlin affected me.  Either music has kit drums everywhere or no rhythm whatsoever.  But I was starting to think about the nature of the AV performances and the accessibility of all of them
        If you know my work from other conferences or festival or stuff, you find me running a hackathon there, themed around music and art, but often with an accessibility angle.  Things like creating 3D printed prosthesis for people to have a guitarplaying hand in place of their usual prosthetic hand which I find superenriching and met all kinds of cool people in those fields.  And ended up working with other people who were making interesting comments about accessibility and enabling themselves with assistive devices that could be seen as an extension of the body rather than just a replacement for something.  For instance, maybe you've seen the work of this fabulous person.  Victoria Modesta is a selfdescribed amputee, model and pop star who has  who you will often find with a range of fantastic designed prosthetic limbs such as the one in this piece which was for a shoot that we did for make magazine and I think then later in Wired where they 3D printed human leg bone replica inside transparent plastic with propylene glycol and a molded carbon fiber body suit which I was monitoring the position, movement, orientation and temperature of Victoria's body as well as her pulse rate and blood oxygen saturation through an ear lobemounted sensor so that we could just make generative music that wasn't being performed by the person who was generating it.  But just that their movement and their body was naturally going to generate it.
      And that was a superfun piece to work on and see here the sensor I was talking about on the ear lobe, which is great unless you've filled your ear lobes with other stuff like I have.  But, yeah.  So, using signals from the body to generate music and then kind of measuring how the music affects your body and making these weird, interesting feedback loops has become, yeah, a big part of my work.  I could do lots of like datadriven stuff such as this piece which I was invited with a bunch of other artists to use the data from the first LSD brain imaging study which happened at the nearest psychopharmacological department at the Imperial College, London, and take the test subjects under the influence of LSD and use that to make pieces of sound art.  This is the sound you're hearing now that I made with two other amazing, creative sciences.  And accompanied that with visuals from my own brain scans.  Going to turn it down a little bit.  But leave it playing.
      So, now, if anyone has had scans of any kind done, get copies of your scans.  They will send you those on a DVD and they're superinteresting.  There's free open source software you can use to make visualizations like this and look at the inside of your own body.  You'll get data from it.  And  yeah.  And if you have access to that kind of information, why not use it to make something weird like this?  So, continuing in my vein of datadriven artworks, I also was working recently with images made from 3D constructs of the CRISPR Cas9 protein.  Because lots of people are superexcited about that in terms of genome editing stuff which, yeah.  Making cool stuff like this.
      Rotating the molecules of things that we're interested in.  Any chemistry nerds here?  Chemical Adam on their own.  Boo.  You're all missing out.  Chemistry's great.
      ¶ ¶
      I'm going to jump through this a little bit because we move from the sound created first from patients under placebo being scanned using 400 channels of magneto cyclography.  And we had the patient with the placebo and then a 10minute scan under LSD and then you can 
      ¶ ¶
      hear how we attempted to maybe convey some of that LSD experience by putting brains through kaleidoscope, because, really, what can we say LSD does if it doesn't put your brain through a kaleidoscope.  Any questions?  I like to keep it informational.  Over here.  You can shout or wait for a mic.  We won't judge you.  We believe in you, microphone.  You can do it.
      AUDIENCE: You talked about open source software.  Which one and where can I find it?
      CHEMICAL ADAM: So, there's an excellent piece of software called Slicer, I think it's just on slicer.org, even.  There's also another free to use but closed source viewer called OsiriX, which is something slightly closer to using Dicom or scanned images in hospital itself.  And Slicer is more like if you want to do interesting stuff liar go from your scan to a 3D print to print a copy of your head, which why haven't I done that yet?  I keep noticing that all of my art is about heads and faces a lot.  Maybe because I'm a huge narcissist.  And had lots of weird interesting brain stuff happen to get these scans.  Had a stroke, I've died, been in a coma.  And it's led me to think about interesting stuff.  But we can talk more about that later.  Another question on this side?
      AUDIENCE: Hi, so, you're talking about using auditory and visual stimulation at the same time.  So, there's a magnificent way of creating motion sickness in people by playing with the vestibular systems and the motion system.  Did you make people sick?
      CHEMICAL ADAM: We did have incidents with things like playing sine waves but modulating the position of them in space using a slightly different frequency, that if you stood in the peaks with your eyes shut, it make yours inner ear automatically correct the position.  So, with the eyes closed, people would do this and eventually fall down.  We couldn't put a mat there because they would know they're supposed to fall down.  You get into this whole ethical, don't make people fall over kind of thing.  But, you know, you want to make an omelet.  Another question right here?
      AUDIENCE: I have a number of MRI scans on a regular basis and I quite enjoy the noises that it makes.  Have you ever thought about doing anything with the noise that the machines actually make?
      CHEMICAL ADAM: You got me earlier, those sleepovers sounds, they sound like an MRI machine to be fair.  Yeah, I've had a lot of MRI.  If you have a long one or fMRI scans, it's hard to stay awake, I find.  Five-minute warning?  Okay.  Thank you.  But, yes, you can do interesting stuff with MRIs.  Some of these images were from compound MRI and CT scan.  And, yeah, you can do interesting stuff.  Make a 3D model of your head with everything except the bones in it.  And get into some weird stuff like that.  But, yeah, absolutely.  Have a look.  Maybe OsiriX slightly better to start with which like I said is free if you're not using it commercially and has a big for not like medical use on it unless you pay for a license.  But it's great.  I can show you how to use it if you would like.  Another question down here?  Thank you also to anyone who came and caught my live set in here last night.  That was quite a party.  They have got some serious lasering in here.  There's a question at the front here.  I can hear you.  I'll repeat the question sew everyone else can hear it.
      
      So, the technician probably won't be able to help you.  But you can request at the time that they send you a copy of it, but also as long as it remains in your medical records you're allowed to ask for copies of them which is why I have cool stuff like this Xray of my hand with my RFID chip inside it.  Which is on this side.  And then the magnet on the other side.  Which I don't have a scan with the magnet in yet.  And I'm told now I can still have MRIs, but only in a machine that has less than 11 Gauss.  Will it pull the magnet out?  No, it will oscillate the magnet and it will catch fire inside you.  Whereas the RFID I've had no problems with.  Someone asked me how is the magnet going through airport security.  I have metal on my body.  Didn't make a difference.  The chip hasn't yet.  Hasn't shown up on an Xray.  I haven't had an opportunity to see what it looks like yet.  I'll be interested to see what that looks like.
      If I can finish what I was talking about.  Thank god for  think, maybe.  There's another  at the back here?  Maybe it was.  My chip is not that useful in everyday use anyway.  It's for infinitely long dance music accompanied in the code by the ego death by nitrous oxide.
      [ Applause ]
      Because I wanted to use exactly the 888 bytes of storage in the most interesting way possible.  And I was enjoying kind of demo scene and stuff and how long and interesting a thing can you fit into this many bytes.  Which so now it's a piece of music that exists in basically every medium other than a recording as it exists as code, as an image on the Internet, as an installation as I built a piece that I go and place the code on and then I can perform it, evaluate it.  It executes in sonic Pi, which is a great live coding language, preloaded on Raspberry Pi's default operating system and everyone should know about and use.  And also, in sonic Pi, it has the comments about the poem was talking about.  Take a look at my website if you want to see more stuff like that anyway.  Yeah, sure.
      AUDIENCE: It's just a very quick one.  Which type of chip have you got installed?  The RFID?
      CHEMICAL ADAM: NTAG 216, combination RFID.  It doesn't work on the RFID game on site here because I used all of the 888 bytes.  Thank you.  Yeah, I used all 888 bytes including the bit that should be like the declaration of, hey, this is what kind of device I am.  Talk to me like this.  No, I used it all more dance music.  Treated also with effects that simulate the auditory hallucinations induced by the aforementioned substance.  But, yeah, look at Williams, and there's more stuff in that kind of vein if you would like to see that anyway.  All good?  Let's chat more outside afterwards.  I'm going for a fucking cigarette.  Thank you, everybody.
      [ Applause ]
      >> Thanks, Chemical Adam for what was a very stimulating talk.  Maybe that's not what I should say.  All right.  Thank you all very much.  Just a quick announcement.  Volunteers are still needed very badly by the organization who is putting this together.  They need all the help they can get.  And so, please, if you have some spare time, go help them.  You can sit there and have a cup of tea or coffee and be a runner and just go off when you need to go off and that would be fantastic.  Thank you all very much. 
      >> Hello.  Test number one. 

