      Adventures in DIY Electronic Instruments
      
      Scott Pitkethly
      
      >> Hello, good afternoon, everybody.  You are at stage B.  B for bar.  It's right next to the bar.  Makes it easy to find out where you are.  We are here to hear about adventures in DIY instruments by Scott Pitkethly.  That was a tough one.  All the way here from Brighton.  And I want everybody to give him a very warm welcome.  Let's wake up after lunch and give him a very warm welcome right now.  Please, Scott.
      SCOTT: Thank you very much.  Can you hear me okay?  Right.  Who am I?  So, I'm Scott.  Hi.  I'm a video game programmer from Brighton.  And sort of in my free time I make music under the name Cutlasses.  And I'm pretty terrible at DIY around the house.  I've never been very good at that.  And that's put me off of this to begin with.  But I've made some things and made some instruments.  Yeah, I'm pretty much a novice at electronics, really.  I'm only just learning.  So, if I'm lying about anything I'm saying, just shout out and I can probably correct the slide live and we can update it.
       but, yeah, I'm really just going to try and talk about the things that I've learned and picked up and kind of why I found the whole process really exciting.  And hopefully like if it's something you're interested in but not doing it at the moment, I can inspire you to do it.  Because it really is quite easy to get started.  And once you've got started, it's sort of a bit like a drug.
      So, why would you bother making DIY instruments?  Well, the first thing is that you may come up with something completely unique to you.  And so, and your performance or however you're using it.  No one else has got one.  No one else is going to get quite that same sound.  And I was at a talk by Helen Lee yesterday, and she said one of the things she liked about DIY instruments, when you made something, you were the only one that had it and you were the best person at playing that instrument.  And I think that's really great.  Because I don't pretend to be an amazing musician.  If I can master things that I've made myself, that's a nice angle on it.
      Yeah, they can be experimental.  And other things, I quite often use them, mess around, build and record it and go back and kind of cut it up.  It's something that you wouldn't just do on your computer.  Sometimes you can save money.  Styles it's cheaper.  Generally, it's probably not.  Especially when you started getting obsessed by it and buying all the stuff.  It's probably not cheaper.  But it can be.  And you can learn lots of new skills.  I've certainly learned loads of stuff I didn't know about before.  Right.  So, how do we get started?  We decided we wanted to make some instruments, what do we have to do?  The first thing is get yourself a halfdecent soldering iron.  Don't spend a huge amount of money.  But don't get a super cheap one with a plug and a soldering iron on the end.  You can control it, perhaps should be fine.  You're going to get it in loads of areas.  If you can make the soldering good so that's not a problem, that will certainly make things simple when you're debugging things.  Start simple with your soldering.  Get kits and wires.  A lot of you here are already building things anyway.  But if you're not, just, yeah.  You can't go wrong.  Get cheap kits, solder components together and practice.  There's loads of YouTube videos about it.  Give it a go.  It feels daunting.  And I got very frustrated the first few times I tried, but you can get it and it's not too difficult.  What else do you need?  A semidecent multimeter, an arranging one is useful.  Because you need to know the rough resistance of a resistor.  It will find that for you.  Snips, that's another 5 pounds.  A digital micrometer, I didn't know what that was until recently.  But they're very useful for measuring when you're building things.  Seeing how far apart they are or the diameter or whatever.  Very useful.
      That little picture there is called a helping hands.  It's sort of  you can use it to hold things while soldering.  And they're about 5 pounds.  eBay is your friend in this situation.  Especially if you're prepared to wait for things to come from China, you can get things supercheap.
      I'm going talk about this book briefly.  It's the book that sort of got me into it.  It's called how I made electronic music:  The arts of hardware hacking.  I think it's amazing.  And you are interested in getting started, then read that book because it's really inspirational.  Yeah, it's a great book.  And it covers a variety of didn't projects that you can do.  They're really simple to much more complicated.  But ties it back into the history of electronic music and gave me an understanding where they came from and what artists used them.  It wasn't something that I knew that much about.  It's where I nicked most of my initial ideas in this presentation from.
      The first thing I'm going talk about is a contact mic.  Does anyone  who know what is a contact mic is?  Most of you.  Okay.  So, basically, it's probably the simplest thing that you can make.  You can make one for a fiver.  You just get these things, electronic disks.  So, that basically means Piezo is just electric.  They've got a small crystal or ceramic element when they're crossvibrated.  They generate electricity.  So, the sound vibration will generate electricity.  So, the interesting thing about contact mics is that because they are picking up vibrations through solid materials, you don't get any of the sound of the rooms.  You don't hear any reverb and it's a very dry sound.  It sort of sounds unlike you would have heard that sound.  You can never hear anything without it passing through some air.  That means you get some really interesting sounds out of it.  Yeah, I got a note here, you do build one, use the high impedance input on your preamp.  Yeah, they're really, really simple to build.  You can build one in half an hour once you've practiced.
      You just need a piezo electric disk, they are a pence from eBay, shielded audio cable and a jack.  And that's it.  And you basically solder  see that diagram.  The center of the disk is the hot and the outer is the cold.  And you just solder the hot to the tip and the cold to the other part of the jack.  That's it.  And you can do that in, you know, literally half an hour, if that.  And you can make some really cool sounds.
      So, I've  there's  I've just mic'd up a bottle of beer with a condenser mic and a contact mic.  Just get different sounds.  But you can attach them to all sorts of things and hit them or scrape them and bang them.  And you'll get all these kind of sounds that you won't get in any other way.  I also coated mine in this stuff that I later found out is highly toxic.  I didn't find it out by being ill.  Someone told me.  Be careful if you buy that.  It's good.  You can dip your contact mic in that, and so, it's water proof reasonably.  And, yeah, you can attach it to things.  Cheese graters are always good.  A corrugated card that I can scrape and make these sounds.  This image, I did a film recording at New Haven Fall and found this huge iron pipe.  I don't know what it's called, but there's a grating in it.  I managed to put a contact mic in between that, and I bowed it with a violin bow and it sounded amazing.  Hopefully this will work.  Am I getting any sound?  There we go.
      Now, you couldn't hear anything when you were just bowing it.  But you 
      [sounds from bowing pipe]
      That's completely unprocessed.  I used that in some recordings and processed it.  But even with a dry signal, it certainly doesn't have anything like that through the air.  I don't know, maybe that sounds horrible to you.  But I really like that sound.
      So, another thing that contact mics are used for are reverb.  Spring reverbs.  A really early form of reverb.  You get that kind of like twangy guitar sound out of them.  And that's basically in the simplest form, I didn't make these ones, but that's just a contact mic  sorry, a speaker driving a spring attached to a contact mic.  So, basically the sound comes out of the speaker, vibrates the spring and gets picked up by the contact mic.  But there's a delay, so, you get that kind of shimmering delay.  And you can see a couple built that in a shoe box.  I'm trying to cover some really simple things you can do to get you started.  And all of these are sort of referenced in that book.
      Another thing I did, you can take the tape header out of an old tape player and wire it directly to a jack.  And you can actually rub that across tapes and credit cards is a good one.  Anything that's magnetic.  And you can get a weird, scratching a record player kind of sounds out of them.  They're cool.  Those are the kind of things that are pretty easy to, you know, you can make.  For me, that was the thing that went, oh, I made something, and it did work.  And once you've got something working, then you've got sort of inspiration to go on somewhere else.
      So, I think once you've done that, a good  what I did, anyway, I think it was just to start building some kits.  So, there's lots of cheap kits around.  There's a company called Funk who do much more expensive Eurorack kits.  Which are great, and I built a bunch of those.  And smaller companies making their own kits, 64 pixels.  And Racket, but I don't think they're making any at the moment.  Maybe concentrate on the first two.  But, yeah, those are great.
      And the one I started with the Atari Punk console which is really simple to build.  It sounds  well, to my ears it sounds amazing.  I think to most people's ears it sounds very annoying.  But, so, yeah, that's the kit that it comes in and you can build that in a couple of hours and it sounds great.  And I'm going to be doing a performance tomorrow here.  And I'll be showing off some of these things and you'll be able to hear them in a bit more detail.
      So, once you've built your kit or the thing you designed yourself, then you need to start thinking about, well, I want to protect it so that's it's going to last.  If I want to take it to performance, maybe can take it with wires coming out of it.  But it's nice to have it safe.  There's lots of ways of doing this.  You can buy like guitar pedal cases and some come prepainted.  You can repurpose a box that already exists so you can get something laser cut or 3D printed.  I have seen a bunch of 3D printers since I've been here.  I'm sure a lot of you know about this already.  This is out of a mustard tin.  They're cute and nice to use.  It's a MIDI control.  Now I have loads of mustard powder that I'm struggling to get through.  But, yeah, they're nice as enclosures.
      So, that's what I did with my Atari Punk console.  Just a little moisturizer tub.  Which I'll show off tomorrow.  And the funny Christmas treelooking thing  I don't know  was a whole cutter.  It's beautiful.
      So, I've done this sort of bit of tinkering around with things and enjoyed it.  But I sort of then didn't really know to go from there.  And I was doing some live stuff with laptop and guitar.  Sort of field recordings and processing them.  And I really wanted to be able to use my feet because my hands were full of guitar.  So, I went to try and find one.  And I realized there's actually quite a dearth of small ones.  I wanted to fit everything in one bag when doing a gig.  There's an absolutely huge one, about this big.  Did not fit the bill.  And there just didn't seem to be any that really fitted the  what I needed it for.  So, I thought, I actually bought one from I think it was from Japan.  The guy who made them.  And that was really small.  It fit the bill, but you couldn't program it and it didn't match what you needed it to do.  It looks quite simple when I took it apart.  When I heard about Arduino, maybe I can have a go at this.  I started reading about Arduino on development boards and I think this was when I really started to get into the whole idea of, once you do something and it works, it just sort of inspires you to do the next thing.  When that works, you can get a bit more complicated each time.
      So, yeah.  So, I'm guessing that most of you know about Arduino.  How many of you know Arduino?  Yep.  Pretty much everyone.  Okay.  So, yeah.  So, you all know about Arduino.  And there's other ones that exist.  Teensy, there's lots of different boards.  And you can program in C or C++ which is good for me because that's what I do as a job.  Okay.  I know how to do that bit.  Will I be able to do the hardware bit?  I actually concentrated on Teensy which is Arduinocompatible.  It's really small so it will fit inside a small enclosure.  And I would say it's probably more suitable to doing USB than maybe the Arduino because it supports that out of the box.  It's cheap.  About 20 pounds.  Which you're just doing MIDI, it's absolutely fine for that, so, that could be even cheaper.  That's the data sheet for it.  It's a 32bit arm chip.  ARM is what's in most of our phones.  And you can program it in C.  It's got a bunch of analog and digital ins and out, which is basically what we need.
      So, as a really simple space, as you all know, as Arduino program is, you can just say digital, right?  Here's the pin number.  I would like to set that high, please.  And that pin will output a high voltage or basically 5 volts.  Or whatever voltage it supplies.  And so, I prototyped all about on soulless bread board, which is what that is there.  And the good thing about that, because it's low voltage you can hack it around and hot plug it until it works, basically.  I would have gotten something wrong and been like, why doesn't that work?  Without worrying about getting a shop or anything.  That's just a very simple version with four LEDs but without switches.  That's pretty much the schematic for this MIDI pedal that I made.  It's just four switches and five LEDs read in code.  It was really simple.  Once I bread boarded out, I can do this.  It's really easy.
      It's basically four guitar pedal switches, some LEDs and then the code I wrote which is pretty short, really.  And now I programmed it.  I can configure it to do whatever I want.  I can tie it into my performance and make things work as I need them to work.  Yes.  So, also, I put in  so, there's four LEDs for when you press the pedals.  There's also one for MIDI clock.  So, I can see the clock.  Which I still haven't decided whether that's a good thing or not.  It's useful to know the time, but it's really annoying if you're playing a dark stage, it's all you can see.  I put low resistance from the LED.  So, it's blindingly bright.  That was a good idea.  Yep.  I mounted it on board and bought a prepainted guitar pedaling enclosure and made a schematic and it looked like that.  I don't know if you can see that.  But that's just before I drilled it.
      And there I am drilling it.  At a very slanty angle.  I hope that wasn't actually how I drilled it.  Maybe I did that for a photo, I'm not sure.  I now have a drill press, which is one of my best investments.  And that certainly makes it a lot easier because I had a very sweary table when I was trying to drill something and break the drill bit.  But I got a drill press.
      And that's it, I'm not sure about the incredibly long wires.  This was a few years ago.  I'm not sure why I did that.  But it works.  There it is finished.  And it still works now.  So, that sort of  yeah.  So, it gives me this level of control as I said, and it's pretty short in terms of code.  And all this stuff's on GitHub.  Anything that you want to read about, it's up there.  And I'll put this presentation up there as well.
      So, yeah, in terms of things I learned from building that, yeah, get a hole cutter.  Don't try to use massive drill bits, that's not a good idea.  Buy enough components so you can keep a working prototype.  Don't harvest your prototype to build the  your final product because then when it doesn't work, you don't have anything to refer to.  These are all things learned from experience.  Yes.  And when you are making a drill sheet, bear in mind that the drill sheet might be twodimensional, but the thing is actually threedimensional.  Where I drilled the hole to put the switches, it was the same as the USB.  They were the same space and didn't work.  I was able to fiddle it around, so it worked.  This is a very specific bit of advice, don't flash a teensy thread on powered USB you been had.  It will break it.  It's fine.  You can flash it again directly.  But it just took me ages to figure out that's what had gone wrong.
      So, one side's got my confidence up.  Built this MIDI pedal.  Oh, I can build stuff.  That's going to be fun.  And Eurorack.  Show of hands?  Still quite a lot of you.  So, yes.  It's a modulist format.  I like the look and it's visually interesting.  But the cables upset my OCD a little bit.  I prefer to have no cables plugged into them.  But that's just me.
      But they are superexpensive.  So, there's mine.  But, yeah.  So, there's someone's modular synth.  I imagine there's tens of thousands of pounds worth of equipment in there.  So, yeah, so, I sort of decided that if I was going to do any stuff in Eurorack that I was going to have to DIY it.  Because, A, it would make it a bit cheaper.  Also, I would get the fun of building it and, you know, it would  because I built it myself, I thought maybe I would use it a bit more and get a bit more invested in it.  Which I think it did and that worked.  I got a couple of kits from Funk.  But I really wanted to make my own module.  And I liked the idea of doing the whole process of making the hardware, designing the panel and sort of get, you know, being involved in each process.  So, I started with this kit called the radio music which is by a chap called Tom Witwell who does music things.  It's inspired by John Cage and the radio compositions.  You can put audio on an SD card and it will cut between the audio.  How it's done is it's controlled by a controlled voltage going into it.  That's TEE NSYbased.  I understand that.  I built a whole lot of new stuff.  That's how you get power to the TEENSY.  Okay.  That's what a voltage regulator is.  Okay.  Sort of building these kits, I slowly started to learn what these things are.  And I've now written my own firmware for the radio music which is basically a piano player.  It has a single piano song and then plays the pitch on the control voltage, so you can basically play it like a piano.  It does have reverb on it and it sounds good enough.
      So, once I've done this, I sort of started to get a little bit obsessed by TEENSY.  When I found out they had this audio library, I thought it kind of keyed into the things I like which are like programming, tick, electronics, sound, composition, yep.  I sort of really bought into making stuff on the TEENSY.
      So, I've made a bunch of different audio effects I've made one on the TEE NSY.  I don't tend to use this now, I use the DAC that comes with, it's fiber and sounds fine.  I wanted to make an effect that could manipulate live audio.  And TEENSY has a limited amount of memory, 64K.  Which I think in the microphones of the world, these Dev boards, is actually quite a lot.  But doing audio, it's not much.  64K doesn't give me very much room for sampling.  I'll just work on really tiny buffers like granular synthesis.
      So, the  I had a 50K buffer, which is about half a second of sound.  Recording at 16 bit or about a second at 8 bit.  I found 8 bit to be a bit too noisy, so I tended to use more of a buffer.  It's constantly sampling the audio and hit the freeze button and play back that tiny loop.
      So, this is a rather crude diagram of it.  So, the buffer there is represented by that cassette tape.  And essentially so the audio is coming in and going out all the time.  But as soon as you hit the freeze, it's playing that buffer back.  And then you can use the control on it to use a smaller window in the buffer and you can adjust the size of that.  That's what I looked like when I bread boarded that up.
      And so, I'd used Veriboard before and that had worked okay.  And it's cheap and, you know, but it's  it becomes more fiddly when you want to make something really, really complicated.  But I found out that you can actually have PCBs manufactured very cheaply.  And I always assumed that was something you would have to have a thousand done and cost thousands of pounds.  But, no, that's something you can do.  And you can add your own PCBs which I had a go at which was a complete disaster.  I'm going to have another go at it.  But at the moment I've just been etching  sorry, designing my own.
      So, there's this bit of software called Eagle which allows you to design PCBs.  It's free.  I think  yeah.  I'm pretty sure it's still a free version.  There's a maximum PCB stuff.  But for my stuff, that's been ample.  The UI  is somewhat unorthodox.  I think that's probably being quite kind.  It felt a bit like  to me like the person  or the people who had written it hadn't used any software with the user interface before.  It sort of eschews every paradigm in software, and everything you should be able to do, that's not how you do it.  But once you learn it, you kind of get it, it's very powerful.  You draw out your schematic and add all your components.  And that's the schematic for the first version of the audio freeze.  TEENSY is the big triangle, and the others are the audio jacks.  Then when you have your schematic, you can turn that into a PCB.  And you lay out the components, and it feels like an Indy video game, and you have to cross the tracks and that's a lot of fun until you have spent five hours.  There's no way to get one to here.  There's no way to connect up.  But, yeah, you did it.  But it's fun.  Basically, Eagle produces files that you can have manufacturing pretty cheaply.   The fabrication is not expensive.  It's about 3 pounds a board.  I have found places cheaper than that.  And you can have a minimum of ten or five.  So, you don't have to spend a huge amount of money.  It took about a month Tor these to arrive.  And you can pay more and have them sort of delivered more quickly.
      And as soon as you can make your own PCBs, you can be a lot more ambitious about what you make.  And also  and there's loads of kind of schematics online that you can find that you can learn from.  Once I started doing that, I made my own PCBs, that really started accelerating.  And on the modules, they had a fascia, and the PCB sits behind that fascia normally.  And that is then mounted into your case.
      And most modules that you buy commercially use metal panels.  But I didn't have that.  But I  so, I used the laser cutter and basically laser cut acrylic.  And I'm sure all of you know about laser cutters, you can create a vector image and apply it to the laser cutter and it will cut it out.  I was happy to know a generous friend with a laser cutter.  He let me use his, which was very useful.  But there are other sites like Pinocchio where you can have  send off your files and they'll send you the laser cut file in the post.  That's the vector image.  I'm not sure how well you can see that.  But essentially the color dictates where it's going to cut or whether it's going to sort of engrave rather than cut.
      And then I used the PCB design in Eagle to lay out where everything should be.  I knew the PCB was where the components were, and I could lay that out in a layer and fit everything else around that.
      So, there it is.  Cutting.  And it's quite an amazing thing when you design something entirely digitally and then this magical robot cuts it out for you and just watching it is totally mesmerizing.  I have covered it there in masking tape.  And you'll see why in a second.  That's just acrylic covered in masking tape.
      And I then sort of painted over it.  So, I then peeled off the masking tape and then it looked like that.  So, that  and those are the controls on there.  But I've got a video which should have time to play.  It's not very long.  So, hopefully.  This is actually a more up to date version of the audio.  It's got a larger buffer and hopefully will do more.  Hopefully it will work.  That's a contact line that's picking it up and putting it into the  and then going straight into the audio freeze.
      
      ¶ ¶
      And that's playing it in reverse.  You can adjust the speed and also the position of the buffer.  So, that's a very small buffer that's sort of scrolling along.  So, it's like a very crude form of like time  which I found by accident.  I wasn't meaning to do that.  There's a little music box I got off beat baby.  You can program your own melodies by stamping out the paper.
      
      ¶ ¶
      These are great  these spaces are very good bedfellows.
      [sounds  pinging sounds]
      So, is sounded like a tape effect later on.  Try to sound like a broken tape.  Which is basically the low frequency oscillators that will adjust the speed at the playback head.
      [oscillating sounds]
      That's me ramping up the amount of silly tape effects.  There we are.  And, all that's taken from the video that I've made on YouTube, so, if you're interested in those sounds and you can check them out there.  So, you can build your own one of these if you want.  All the files are on GitHub including Gerbers and the schematics.  If you want to build one, you can.  Because it's TEENSYbased, you can do something better or different.
      I have done a little bit on the 3.2, the 65K.  And the 3.5 came out.  I had more memory.  A whole 256 kilobytes of ram.  A massive amount.  And they have floating point hardware.  So, get stuff working on the 3.2 when I was trying to do DSP, digital signal processing, I had to write my own fixed-point library to do the math quick enough to get it to work.  But on the TEENSY, you don't have to do that.  It's got a built-in float unit.  That allowed me to do a lot more signal processing.  And then I saw one a bit not so made loads  well, I say loads.
      So, yeah, I've sort of made a little suite of them.  This is the kind of more up to date audio freeze in a much more reduced size panel.  Which is here.  And so, it's just sort of like two layers of PCB.  So, narrow, and uses up a bit less space in the case.  There it is from the side.  And so, yeah, that PCB I just had printed, and it comes in the post and it's a really cool thing.  When you design something digitally and it's physically manifested and given to you.  It's great.  So, yeah, so, I've made a bunch of other effects.  Something called the glitch delay.  Which is similar to audio frequencies, it's a delay of playing a lot of tiny buffers jumping about at different pitches and then you can sort of blend those sounds together.  There's videos of that on YouTube.
      The ChronoCrusher, which is delay and reverb and a bit crusher at the end.  You can get the low delay sounds.  And I wrote this piano player for radio music.  And all the codes and schematics are on GitHub.  They're open source and you can take them can do what you like with them.  This is the case I built to house them all in.  Just made out of a lunchbox I found on the Internet.  So, I guess put some wood into it to make the bars to screw the panels into, and that's just a little power supply that kind of the power supply bit is actually premade, and I just wired that in some variable and put the connector into.
      So, yeah, so, there's a bunch of ones I've made housed.  And I've used aluminum panels there.  Now I have my drill press, I can drill things more easily with less swearing.  And so, yes.  That there is the glitch delay, the ChronoCrusher and the audiofreeze all together.  And the guitar amp.  I put my guitar through these.
      Yeah.  So, final thoughts.  Yeah.  So, I would say if you're interested in building stuff, then do it.  Because obviously we're all makers of some description.  Particularly if you're interested in building instruments, I would definitely go for it.  It's really rewarding.  Getting something in the post that you've made digitally is great.  Just having an idea and weeks and weeks later finally you've got something and it's great.  And with the Internet, it makes everything so much easier.  So, I've focused primary on the TEENSY just because that's what I was into.  But there's obviously ways of doing things, there's Raspberry Pi.  But also, there's analog and a load more stuff you can do in the analog realm.  I've not done so much that have because I'm not as experienced in that.  But there's loads of crazy things you can do there.  And often you get more weird, unexpected stuff happening in analog.  That's why they take long.  And we don't expect them to stop you doing what you do.  But if it can be brought to audio, that can be cool.  How to get started.
      Practicing soldering.  I definitely recommend reading that book.  I don't have any interest in it.  I don't know Nicolas Collins, but I think it's a great book and I really recommend it.  Build some kits.  I think that's a really great way of learning thing.  I have seen my time's up.  So, yeah, thank you very much to  to  electromagnetic Field.  If you want to get any of this stuff, I'm on GitHub and you can check out my music and some of the music I've used to make these things.  And as I said, I'm doing a live performance tomorrow at 9:00.  You will hear this stuff being used hear what it sounds like in a more sort of performance environment.  Thank you very much for having me.  Cheers.
      >> Thank you.  I think we have time for one quick question.  If there's someone who has a question, please raise your hand.  Okay.  I guess you're just going to have to mob him after.  Thank you very much.
      SCOTT: Thanks.

