      The Truth, PostTruth & Nothing Like The Truth
      
      Eric Drass aka shardcore
      
      >> Hello, and welcome to stage B.  I'm your herald.  I will introduce the speaker, but first announcements.  Tomorrow there will be a big gathering outside of the null space at 10:30 a.m.  There will be five satellites flying over the camp and we will all be making a howling wolf statue that you can see from space.  You will be part of a structure seen from space if you can wake up at 1030 and then to bed.  There's a page on Wiki, EMF wolf from space.  Secondly, we need more volunteers to do the audiovisual stuff.  The person recording right now is a volunteer.  Please go to the camera to sign up to play with the camera for half an hour for a talk.  Anymore.  Cool.
      Yeah.  If you want to volunteer, these guys can go to some talks.  We really want your feedback.  And there's a form on the website.  EMFcamp.org/feedback.  Leave feedback anonymously about your experiences of the talk, experience of the camp.  What you liked or did not like here.  We would like to hear from you.  Please leave feedback.  Thirdly, a swap shop in the Cy Bar tonight, and you can bring yours and take away those that you want.  Those are all the announcements.
      Now I would like to introduce the speaker, Eric Drass, also known as shardcore.  And the talk about will be about trust and posttrust.  Before the talk I actually have to give a disclaimer.  Me introducing this talk doesn't mean I'm endorsing it because I'm working for a fact checking organization.  I don't know about the contents of the talk.  Never met the speaker.  Please enjoy.
      ERIC: The Internet is full of lies.  Hello, everyone.  Thank you for coming.  I'm Eric Drass.  When I'm here physically, I'm shardcore on the Internet for long and tedious reasons.  And I'm here to talk about truth and what's happening with truth in 2018.  I work on algoculture, the interaction between human culture and machines.  Culture 2009ed by E.B. Tyler, a bearded Victorian man, that complex hole that includes knowledge, belief, art, law, custom and any other capabilities acquired by man as a member of society.  Keyword being here, man.  It's not like that anymore.  Culture doesn't only exist in humans.
      I tend to think of culture itself as the organism.  We are all instantiating some culture and we share it between us and we keep culture alive.  We share culture and share ideas.  We communicate.  If there was a magic ray from the satellite tomorrow morning that wiped our brains, we would wake up and be banging rocks together.  Culture is a thing that makes us clever.  We're fundamentally just hairless apes.  Where does culture live?  Culture lives here.  This is a data center in the middle of the desert.  This is where Facebook lives.  Unfortunately, or fortunately, that's now part of culture.  One of the things I do as an artist is introduce algorithmic entities into this blended culture.  Often in the form of Twitter bots.  Easiest way of describing it is the nature of the Internet.  We look at Internet traffic, 61.5% of traffic going over the Internet is not human.  This is what you would call bot traffic.  Obviously, a lot of it is banks talking to each other.  But it's fundamentally machines talking to other machines rather than humans talking to each other.  If you look at Twitter in particular, Twitter, by its own admission, has 8.5% nonhuman interactions.  It's about 23 million bots living on Twitter.  23 million of the people that you interact with living online are not.  They're machines.
      These days we tend to think of it in terms of these kind of machines.  The kind of Russian troll farm where a message is sent out expressing a particular political view and then it's replicated thousands and thousands of times by accounts that may or may not seem plausible.  But they amplify the signal.  They make more noise about the thing that you want to say.  But we're going to go back to 2010.
      When this guy was still part of our government.  And he turned up to the Houses of parliament off his face.  As you can see.  I actually started building bots before that.  These are two bots from 2006.  This is the truth, first bot I built.  Which mashed up celebrity gossip from Paris Hilton and generate new celebrity facts.  And I got one in the similar form, the Word of God which took the Koran, the King James Bible and the Complete Works of L. Ron Hubbard and mashed them together.  So, you generate the word of God.  This was back in 2008.  If you use the #god, you are followed by preachers in America.  I liked to think there were avid Christians following my bot which contained lots of Scientology.
      Twitter changed.  Twitter became less about having fun and making injokes with fellow nerds and became more about selfies or people with really obnoxious opinions.  Who feel they have to get in your face and say we don't want to know about anything you know.  I have an opinion, fuck off.  And it was about 2010 when I realized that the Internet was full of lies.  It was actually prompted by this image of Barack Obama reportedly showing that he was a student.  What happens is people see this, and if you think Barack Obama was not born in the states, you Retweet it.  It's not time to check the voracity.  And you can pass things on, especially if they have your world view.
      And I had fact bot, a Twitter bot that makes up lives to introduce obvious falsehoods into the Internet.  I took a particular mean form with your picture and your text.  So, caterpillars are attracted to the color blue more than any other color.  That may or may not be true.  I don't know.  A Coke molecule is made up of  less likely.  I don't know, you put a picture of a hamster on it, maybe it's true.  I noticed early on that the celebrity facts are popular.  Drew Barrymore can survive six weeks without eating.  Again, maybe it's true.  I don't know.
      Most interesting are on the edge of believability.  Ultrasonic sounds communicate with each other.  Apparently, that's true.  And someone came up after a talk and said apparently, they do squeak at each other.  Even a machine designed to lie like a stopped clock sometimes tells the truth.  Obviously, this stuff is drawing from the Internet and the Internet is not yet fully sentient.  We don't have a good semantic web, so it will produce these kinds of things.  Takes a cricket up to 49 days  that's the number one hit for the word "Cricket."  My bot doesn't know that's not a cricket.
      You may know this, 1886, there are no facts, there are only interpretations.  2017, there's this guy, saying the same thing.  The same lines.  There's no truth.  There's no underlying truth that you guys can get at.  All you have to do is believe me.  Believe the words that I say.  Because I am your orator of truth.  Lying obviously has been around for a while.
      I particularly love the Weekly World News.  American publication.  Atlanta woman has world's smallest face.  Saddam and Osama have shaved baby ape.  But it was one month after their gay wedding shocked the world, seemed implausible before.  And other forms of lies pedaled out as truth.  I'm unsure of your political leanings, but I would expect you're not  I can show this slide.  These lies are told to us  not to us directly, but to lots of other people who buy this and believe it.  Sort of about migrants and statins.  Interestingly, politicians are well aware of this.
      A brief clip here of Newt Gingrich which gets to the nub of it.  Oh, can we have sound?
      >> The average American I bet you this morning does not think crime is down, does not think they are safer.
      >> We are safer, and it is down.
      >> No, that's your view.  People feel more threatened.
      >> They feel it, but the facts don't support it.
      >> As a political candidate, I'll go with how people feel, and I'll let you go with the theories.
      ERIC: So, that's an amazing confession and interestingly been deleted.  It's a good job.  I ripped that off YouTube.  He doesn't want to be known for confessing the truth.  Which is the feelings of our fellow humans are what sell political stories and move hearts and minds.  You don't move brains.  You don't rationalize, you don't weigh out the truth and give people the options and let them make a decision.  How do you feel?  I feel scared.  Great.  Vote for me, I'll make you less scared.  That's all you need to do as a politician.  Truth is, you know, a little sprinkling of dust on the top.  Which brings us to where we are.
      2018.  What the fuck is going on.  Donald Trump said on the campaign trail that online popularity is more powerful than wealth.  And he is allegedly a very wealthy man.  And it's true.  He got where he is by the fact that he was on television and people liked to about him.  Not through any political skill, becoming evident.  And social media is like crack.  We are highly addictive humans.  And we're highly addicted to this mechanism.  We're evolved to recognize novelty and danger.  You know?  If we were out on the African Savannah with our fellow nomads and a lion appears, that's important.  We should pay attention and we should remember that the lion livers blind that rock.  We get a good hit of important information.  Now we have social media feeds which can give us a hit every split second.
      But we're still evolved exactly the same way.  We're really excited.  I've learned something new, I've learned something new and it keeps us addicted to it.  It's a useful place to mess with the truth and mess with propaganda.
      let's have a look at our relationship with reality.  We have a reality, a fundamental reality that exists outside of ourselves.  That may or may not be true.  That's another talk.  There is an external reality.  On top of that, you guys are directly receiving me give this talk.  You guys have a pretty good relationship with what's going on in terms of truth right now.  But rarely do we get that close.  We get it, and someone comes out, I saw this absolutely fucking guy at EMF Camp.  That's obviously going to happen after this talk.  On top of that, we have opinion.
      Well, I spoke this guy who saw that thing and he said he was a wanker, that's important.  We are further and further away.  Now we exist in this layer.  Delicious, crispy bullshit.  That's a much happier place to live in.  All the fun stuff is living up there.  It's a long way from reality.  Following on from the previous speaker, from the evil empire, Eric Schmidt from the evil empire himself said it's hard for people to watch or consume something that's not tailored to them.
      He said this a couple years ago.  But think about what that means.  You have no direct access to reality anymore.  Mediated by machines, mediated by an algorithm.  An algorithm shows you what you get to see or what it thinks you like.  And we have a reality and we have a machine perception.  And that's what we get to see.  We don't get to see the world anymore.  We get to see what the machines see of the world.  On the top of it, another layer we have fucking crispy bullshit.  We're not related to the underlying truth anymore.
      And who is more responsible for this?  The man with the world's most punchable face.  I don't think he's fundamentally evil himself.  I'm sure amongst this audience, we've all met people very much like Mark Zuckerberg in our time.  He's wellmeaning, but around him, because of the system he's built are very nasty people.  This is Bob Mercer who is a data controller and data evangelist in the states.  He's part of this network which has a whole set of political relationships to  much like a pressure group in a political situation to apply money and power to persuade people's minds.  You can do it at the data level now.
      Now, this talk when I first gave it a few months ago, Cambridge Analytica hasn't blew up most interesting was what they call themselves, Cambridge Analytica.  We use data to change your behavior.  Written on their mission statement.  Isn't that one of the most evil things you have heard.  What does Cambridge Analytica do?  They take data and change your behavior without you necessarily being conscious of it.  And to do this they use the nowfamous ocean scores based on models of people who filled in online personality tests.  Allowed them to take this slicing of the psychographic profile.  They used these profile and the behavior of those people to extrapolate on to the entire rest of the Facebook population.
      Here's a lovely diagram of them squishing together lots of data points.  You put it in the great magical machine and out comes the psychographics, your data graphics, all that will sell you the piece of shit in the side bar.  Thankfully they got caught, or at least Cambridge Analytica got caught.  But the fundamental process of gathering data and analyzing it algorithmically to produce a summary, like the last talk.  That's what neural networks do, you gather a huge amount of data to produce a memory.  Is fundamentally a dangerous thing.  If you're paying for it, you're the product being sold.  Which I'm sure you've heard before.  But it's very true.  Particularly in Facebook.  We're in a situation of weaponized social media.
      Now, the problem is, we stink.  Everything that we do online.  Everywhere we go, every purchase we make is recorded somewhere by someone.  And if that is part of the network being run by a large social network, for example, a Facebook tag is pretty much on every page of any major website now, they're tracking stuff way outside of what you're doing on Facebook.
      This seems fine and innocuous until this guy turned up and freaked a lot of people out.  He revealed all sorts of things.  My personal favorite, this one, which I have to look up, is the combined federated battle laboratories network.  This is from the documents.  This shows the data sharing relationship this goes on between countries.
      The important thing to remember is when your elected official says, don't worry.  We're not going to look at your data.  We're not going to monitor it.  That's fine.  We're interested in your privacy.  They have a data sharing relationship with someone else in the network.  You can be recorded in England, analyzed in America and the UK can then get the data back.  Oh, we didn't do it ourselves, but we shared the results of this.
      And as you can see, there's lots of networks, there's a lot of countries involved.  This stuff is like from 2006.  This stuff has been going on for a long time.  A lot of my work as an artist is being quite angry about this stuff, as you may have told.  This is a bot that I built while Teresa May was home secretary.  Which is a Twitter pot that never Tweets.  This simply looks for people using particular hashtags of the charter.  When it finds someone like that, it stops putting them on Twitter lists.  Abhorrent voting behavior, candidate for extradition, deep search, that kind of thing.  And these are timed over time, so you get a flurry of worrying lists you're added to.  And over the next couple of weeks you get more and more, fundamentally showing you what's going on.  They're putting all of us on lists in some way.
      This was quite a fun bot.  People really liked it.  They're not sure if it's true or not.  Some people got very pissed off.  I like this one here, this is not acceptable to allow Teresa May bot to put people on lists.  That's the fucking point.
      Obviously, it aroused the ANON 4chan freaks who said block it immediately.  This is a sinister bot out to collect information.  It's not it's a hundred lines of Python.  It's really nothing sinister.  But if you start doing this stuff, start putting people on lists, they get very, very disturbed.  And the point it's making is we're all effectively being scored.  This is from a Chinese railway station with face identification running.
      China is actually quite interesting because they can do what the fuck they want.  And they're doing a lot of technically interesting and morally terrifying things.  For example, this popped up a few weeks ago.  The Google Glasstype device that the lady cop was wearing allows realtime facial identification of people in the crowd.  And within the first few days they were tapping people at the train stationing, no, you have an arrest warrant.  You're not who you say you are right in the face of the cop.
      Now, as we know, China's bad.  It's not happening anywhere else.  But it kind of is.  Several US states have admitted to keeping scores on individuals who live in their states.  So that when you are stopped by law enforcement, the police officer can see your risk.  You know, mark out of ten, how likely is this guy to be a villain or not?  That's been analyzed from data behind your back that you can't see.  That will be fucking great if it worked.  But as we discovered, these systems don't.  Some of you may be familiar with this.  This is a set of images that can be identified by object recognition networks as the things that they say.  So, these squiggly lines.  Says king penguin.  Show that image.  It's been trained on thousands of images of king penguins, but because of the way it cease the world, which is not human, you can find these adversarial patterns that when put in front of a machine will produce the response.  This one here.
      This is a 3Dprinted turtle that identifies as a rifle in any orientation.  So, you could theoretically walk through an airport with one of these things in where are hand and the automated systems would send the people to knock you down.  This is the problem.  The algorithms are not perfect.
      Here's another example.  Google released an image recognition system on their software.  Once you upload your systems, it would helpfully classify your photographs.  It's a picture of you on the beach.  No, all black people are gorillas is what it said.  The dataset is massively underrepresented.
      it's full of white, pastyfaced programmers.  They have a lot of people taking pictures of gorillas, they must be the same thing.  Interestingly, Google's response to this was not to fix their algorithm or retrain it, it was to remove the tag "Gorilla" from their systems.  So, it doesn't do that anymore.  But it hasn't actually addressed the underlying system.  We're used to being lied to by algorithms.  Obviously the most obvious being Photoshop's usage.  This is Kim Kardashian in real life and the magazine.  And in the interest of balance, One Direction.  And the images in the media are through an image process.  And they come in, Snapchat filters are the keys to whitening people's skin, thinning their nose.  Makes them look less like their original natural ethnic state.  Because that's the defined algorithmic version of beauty is to be lighter, to have a thinner nose.
      And here's another great example.  This photo innocuously uploaded by a guy on to Google Cloud is actually a composite of two images.  If you compare these two, it's taken these two images and produced  oh and produced this third one where they're both smiling.  That happened entirely automatically without this guy's knowledge.  This is a matter of function within the Google system.  Because you want pictures of people smiling.  But it's no longer the truth.  This moment in time never happened.  But it exists on your phone as something that did happen.
      Lies are put into content.  There's a company called myriad that in real time will put video adds into footage.  If you want to advertise on YouTube, you can buy existing content and put it up.  You may have heard of Deep State.
      [speaking]
      This is Angela Merkel to Donald Trump.
      [speaking German]
      So, it's a little shoddy.  It's not perfect.  But this is been knocked up by guys on their GPUs in their bedrooms.  This kind of style transfer would have taken more a few years ago.  And lo and behold, there's a website for it now.  You can go and set your own deep facts up.  Taken care of.  This is within two months of giving this talk.  This one I find particularly interesting.  The facetoface neural network mapping that allows you to puppet another piece of footage, so you can see the George Bush footage at the bottom, the actor above, and then to the side.  That's the face being puppeted in realtime by an actor.
      Now, if you saw that in your social media feed, there's no reason you wouldn't think that wasn't George Bush saying something.  But that technology exists in the hands of, you know, any of us, basically.  And the one that came out this week that I really liked is emotionally targeted video which is able to extract the pose and movement from video and then transfer it.  This  so, this is the original footage.  These are the people who wrote the code.  And here they are.
      ¶ ¶
      So, as you can see, it's very difficult to believe what you see.  This is another very recent example of videotovideo, allows you to semantically segment a video feed and erase it.  Check out the video on the bottom where they replaced the trees with buildings in realtime.  This entire video sequence is from a semantically created piece of video.  But they can change it.
      Where did this stuff start?  You can blame the nerds, I blame the hippies.
      [ Laughter ]
      In 1968 Robert Anton Wilson and another came up with an operation mind fuck to use the channels to disseminate ideas.
      >> Operation mind fuck guerrilla ontology.  It's to galvanize the minds of many readers and television viewers and movie goers to suddenly see the world in a new way.
      ERIC: Operation mind fuck has three rules, be weird.  Exceedingly wielder.  Be so weird you frighten your neighbors and get weirder still.  This is unknowingly perhaps inspiration for some of my work.  This is a bot that I built for the glitch news work that tells the day's news in 2 seconds.  [really fast] so every four hours you can get the news summarized for you.  Interestingly, this generative artwork came into conflict with algorithms at Tumblr who claimed it was pornography.
      And this happened quite a lot, actually.  Almost every day it would say your news reports are pornographic.  Someone on Twitter found this suggesting maybe that's the source of the pornographic image.  I'm not sure.  But working in this way with social media networks, you are up against automated systems that are trying to prune out lies and prune out filth.  Because there's not enough humans to actually look at this stuff.  And they can catch you out.
      So, just to end, I'm going to talk on a new project we're working on.  In fact, you're one of the first audiences to see it.  So, you're in for a treat.  So, let's talk about porn.
      13% of all Internet searches are for erotic content.  Approximately 30% of all Internet profit is pornrelated.  70%  ha ha  70% of male Internet users consume porn.  This is a huge area of data space.
      There's a lot going on in the world of porn.  The algorithms are looking at that.  They're looking at what you have on Twitter.  But this is actually a true representation of human behavior.  Give a monkey a dark room and a picture of a naked monkey, they get excited.  They do this stuff.  I have been looking at systems that are able to reinterpret pornography in a project I'm calling color anticlimax.  First step was to use Google's own Deep dream systems, trained on finish classification.  But you can use them in reverse and ask the neural network what it thinks it sees.
      Now, for me what's interesting about this stuff is that it exists in that space.  This is only dirty if you think it's dirty.  This is not in and of itself a dirty image.  It's full of puppy slugs up once again, you as adults  the way the machine interprets these pixels is fundamentally different than the way us human beings with genitals do it.  This is more star transfer stuff.  And they tend to get quite beautiful.  This passionate eye of the machine produces kind of, you know, very  kind of pleasingly abstract designs.
      More recently I've been working with generative adversarial networks which attempt to produce data that fits in within the dataset you've got  I haven't got time to go into it.  You may have seen the celebrity faces morph into each other.  This is trained on a girl dancing and it produce this is kind of data space.  This is a machine watching a girl stripping and this is what it thinks it sees.  I kind of find it fascinating.  It's an area of the Internet that people don't talk about.  It's an elephant in the room of data.  A couple more.  This one I quite like.  Three girls.
      So, for me it's about this point where we can look at it and go, oh, that's clearly naked ladies.  That's kind of  makes me feel a bit weird.  But the machine doesn't care.  The machine, this is another set of data, just as your Amazon records are or your, you know, your Google search history.  It's another set of data.
      And it's producing some quite beautiful work, I think.  And anyway.  Why bother?  I'll let Robert Anton Wilson answer that.
      >> There's an old Italian proverb, when four sit down to conspire, three are fools and one is a government agent.  I believe with modern surveillance techniques that's truer than ever, and it's doomed to failure because of the techniques of control.  But the anarchistic come pulses of art cannot be governed.  And I think more and more of the culture shapers are becoming part of operation mind fuck and the whole world is having its mind fucked and I'm happy to play a humble part in this noble endeavor.
      ERIC: So, for me, that's the gist of it.  The only way to get involved in this stuff is to get involved.  As Robert Anton Wilson says, the anarchistic impulses of art cannot be governed.  Which is why we do it.  Thank you.
      [ Applause ]
      >> Thank you very much.  Unfortunately, we don't have time for questions right now.  But Eric will be at the bar which is just behind this tent.  Thank you.
      >> If you could take your chair and put it next to a wall, that would be great.  They need the space cleared for the next event here.  Thank you so much.  Thanks.
