      A Tour Through the Visualization Jungle
      
      Fearn Bishop
      
      >> Hello?  Hello and welcome to stage B.  Before I introduce the speaker, I would like to make four announcements.  First of all, we still have some volunteer shirts which we would like to fill in this event.  EMF is entirely a volunteerrun event.  If you would like to do a couple hours at the bar or maybe helping us with AV setup or maybe doing heralding, like I'm doing, you can sign up in the green room.  It's a few hours of volunteering and gets you a free meal.
      Secondly, there will be a crappy robot competition tonight at 7 p.m. outside the bar.  You can sign up at the information booth.  Thirdly, we appreciate your feedback, what you think about EMF this year.  Go to EMFcamp.org/feedback and leave your feedback anonymously or you can leave your name as you wish.
      Finally, in the Cy bar tonight.  Anyone know where that is?  I don't know.  It's over there.  There will be a tech swap, swapshop.  You can bring your unexpected tech stuff and leave with other people's stuff.  If you want to swap your stuff, come to Cy bar tonight.
      Okay.  So, it is my joy to introduce Fearn Bishop who will talk you about the visualization jungle.
      FEARN: Oh, I am mic'd.  Cool.  Everyone can hear me, right?  It's weird being able to hear yourself.  Like he said, my name is Fearn.  I'm a Ph.D. student at St. Andrews and I work at visualization.  Don't worry, if you want to tell me no to everything I say, or have questions, please do.  So, what I'm going to talk about today is the visualization jungle.  Probably you have seen visual, I'll talk about what that is.  But it's not always very obvious when things are going wrong.  And it's useful to sort of have an idea of the different ways visualization can be done.
      So that you can notice it.  So, let's start by talking about what visualization is.  And this is the most important visualization you'll see today.  How much pie I've eaten and how much pie I have left to eat.  It's a very awkward visualization, because you want both halves to be as big as possible which doesn't geometrically work.  But the idea is that data is the way to visualize it, so you can understand it.  Look at the set of numbers and it's hard to tell if something is going on with them.
      You've probably seen some things like this.  These are all very common visualizations which you'll see out and about.  You'll see them in the news.  You probably have had to use them at work.  And as you can see just from this, there are a great variety of visualizations and they work in very different ways.  Like I said, it is very hard to know what is going on when you're just using numbers.  So, if I show you this dataset here, this is four sets of data.
      So sorry.  Did I break everything?  No.  It's fine.  Okay.  So, if you see those columns going down, one, two, three, four.  And those are all XY coordinates.  And if you do some statistically analysis on them, day look about the same.  The sum is the same, the average is the same.  They all move around in what seems like kind of similar ways.  But if you plot them, then you'll see that actually they are very different.  This particular set of data is called Anscombe's razor, the quartet.  Maybe I should stop wandering around so much, huh?  It makes it very easy to see why a visualization is powerful because a lot of these things are very different.
      So, you can see some of them very spread out, some of them have very solidly defined lines.  If you try to draw through them, they all seem like they have the same statistically properties.  So, why is visualization so powerful?  Well, it's really quite new.  In terms of writing, humans have been doing it for about 5,000 years.  But we've had to use our eyes for a lot longer than that.  Anatomically correct humans happened about 200,000 years ago.  So, there's 195,000 years of difference in that.  And throughout all of that time, we've needed to run from lions and tigers chasing us mercilessly and we've had to find delicious berries.  So, our visual cortex, our visual sense has gotten very good at noticing things that stick out, which makes us very good at spotting patterns.
      But not always is it so easy to tell when something is going wrong in visualization.  I want to take you through some visualizations that have made me angry in the past and talk about why they have made me so angry.  And at the end of this talk, I will give you guidelines how not to do that.  So, if we start with what is quite a simple one.  These are salaries in tech.  So, you have people who have paid too much.  The cream of the crop.  People who are paid enough.  And does anyone want to have a guess at what is third section would be?  Paid  sorry?  All of us.  Yeah.  Probably not.  So, in this visualization, it was women.  And  welcome to why this annoys me.  I'm happy to say in this particular instance it was a parody from a very good set of visualizations which are highlighting some of the diversity problems in tech.  But you will occasionally see visualizations that do this.  It's basically trying to compare two things that are not the same.
      So, taking a tour through the visualization jungle, what doesn't make sense?  What is a bit split?  It's kind of like a platypus.  It's a duck, it's an egg, it doesn't know what it is.  And a visualization, we're in the UK, so, we probably like our pods.  And this map is of every pod in the UK.  And you can probably tell it's not a very useful map.  Would anyone like to try to point out their local to me on this?
      So, as you can tell, it's quite hard.  And really, the problem here is that there is too much data, which is another really easy thing to do in visualizations.  I need to show everything.  So, I'm going put it all into a graph.  And if you put too much in, you can't see anything.  If we're going to go for the animal comparison again, I'm sorry, this next image wigs me out a little bit.  But it's kind of like ants.  You know, when you see a whole group of ants moving around, you can't actually pick out a single ant anymore.  They become a cluster, they don't have an identity of their own.
      Can anyone see what's up with this visualization?  Yeah.  The Y axis.  So, if you were to look at the height of the people in this, you would have to believe that men in the Netherlands are about three times as big as people from the Philippines.  Which is probably not true.  I don't know.  I've never been to the Philippines, but I have been to the Netherlands and they weren't that tall.  Maybe people are really short.  Probably something is going on.  Someone called out, it's the Y axis.  It's starting out on .5, exaggerating the change.
      So, what animals do we know that have a bit of a problem with scale?  I think the giraffes.  Giraffes have a real issue.  Their head is so much higher than everything else.  And it's just a little bit nonsensical.  Here is a useful trick.  If you want to tell your boss you're doing well when you're not actually doing that well.  So 
      [ Laughter ]
      For those who are lagging behind, it took me a little while  actually you guys were all pretty on the ball.  This is cumulative annual revenue.  Which mean use take one year and then you add the next year's revenue on top of it and keep adding up.  So, it will always go up.  And as you can probably see, there's a little bit of a curve at the bottom and perhaps you can see what is coming next if I show you the actual annual review, it ain't so pretty.
      So, what do we know  this is basically a good trick because you're picking your data, right?  You're deciding what you want to show and you're choosing it accordingly.  You're being very picky.  The most picky animal I can think of is the panda who lives solely on bamboo.  It's very cute.  I promise this wasn't an excuse to put the panda in my presentation.  I will move on to one that makes me a little bit angry and you will see me get a little bit angry afterwards.
      [ Laughter ]
      It's really nice, I don't need to present at all.  I can just show you the visualizations and get on with it.  The problem is it doesn't have any relationship between the data and the vase.  13% isn't five times as big at 34%.  One of the reasons that I particularly wanted to give this talk is you may have noticed what's going on in the bottom right of that visualization which is that it was presented on NBC news.  These aren't just things that someone is slipping under the table in their weekly meetings with their boss.  These are being used in the news to deceive people, which is bad.
      So, in this particular case, we're going to go for an analog.  I think this is quite egregious.  I'm going with the most heinous of creatures.  The evil hyena.  And there's the last of lions, tigers and bears which are lions, tigers or bears.  This visualization, it's kind of tricky to spot what's going on, which is one of the reasons it's so dangerous.  Can anyone spot it?
      Yeah.  So, Y axis, but for a different reason.  This time instead of just being cut, it's being flipped.  So, this particular visualization was showing in Florida after the instantiation of a particularly egregious  and you can see it's going down.  But reversing the Y axis, it has a pretty significant impact going up which makes me really angry because there was no way that wasn't intentional.
      So, for some reason I've given this a pretty cute animal even though it makes me very angry.  But the problem is that it blends in just like a chameleon.  It's hard to spot when people to a trick like that.  So, let's talk about how to not do these things.
      Making good visualizations is challenging.  And there are some guidelines I can give you, but the first thing I'm going to tell you is that everything I'm about to say will be wrong at some point in time.  There are always reasons to break the rules.  I think we all know we're breaking them and they can sometimes have more significant impact.  You need to be careful when you're doing it and when you're not.  So, the first thing is you can use appropriate visualizations.
      The source on this slide is a really good website called the Data Viz project.  They have an excellent selection of visualization types and they will help you figure out what you want to use.  So, for example, the bar charts are really good.  If you want to compare  just compare numbers because we're very good at comparing heights.  Because we always want to know how many for we're getting, so, figuring out quantities is something that our visual system is pretty well attuned to.  The hold, that's good for locationbased stuff.  Before anyone shouts at me who is into visualization, some people don't like pie charts because we're not very good at judging angle.  So, you can just turn it into squares and then it is a little bit easier to judge.  You can do it, you cannot do it.  I'm not here to preach for or against pie charts.  That's someone else's problem.
      You can use meaningful colors.  So, in the example we have here, we are showing the colors, and it's quite natural to use the color of the fruit that you're showing.  My personal work is working with young children creating visualizations and see how they do it.  And I see this in primary school children even if it doesn't make sense.  I have people say I made this red because maths is hard.  They'll  you look for meaning in colors.  So, if there is the possibility of using meaningful color, then do.
      One of the places this goes off is gender, like pink and blue.  And sometimes people are unsure about that.  If you really want to break conventions, use completely different colors don't use pink and blue.  Use red or green or something that color-blind people won't be angry at you for.  But don't just use pink and something else because it makes it harder to spot that you've done that.
      Follow conventions.  So, we've talked about the Y axis a couple of times.  Usually zero's at the bottom.  So, unless you have a really good reason for flipping it, don't.  Seems simple.  Apparently not.  And use sensible scales.  There are times where the change is significant.  For example, if it was 1 degree hotter here today, you would make care about that and so you would truncate the Y axis in order to show that variance.  Also common in stock markets.  But that heights, the way that this ended up visually, it made no sense.
      Filter and highlight your data.  Like I said, sometimes you have a lot of things you want to tell people.  And that is okay.  But you need to help them pick out the important parts.  So, rather than showing every pub in the UK, I live in St. Andrews, I really only care about where the ones in St. Andrews are on a daytoday basis, so, tend not to look at where every pub in the UK is, as much as that would be a really good one.
      If you can't filter, you can highlight.  In the second section here, you have a couple of points that are important and being shown in bold.  You can also do multiples.  You can have like multiple visualizations showing lots of different things.  Simplify if possible.  Everyone loves the underground map.  It's the greatest of maps.  If you try to navigate London above the ground, you will get lost quickly.  It has no relationship to how London is laid out.  It's fine underground.  It's fine to simplify thing so long as the message is true to the data that you're showing and you're not trying to distort it in some way.
      Talking about not trying to distort it in some way, don't lie.  That one seems quite obvious, but I'm going to put it up here anyway.  This is what that chart should have looked like.  You can see, it's not that close.  So, to summarize all of those points, don't defy expectations.  It really is that simple.  Just stop and think about how you're doing it and is it the way that makes the most sense.  If it isn't, change something.  Go on the Internet and look at what other people would do.
      I'm going to take you through a really cool visualization which tells a story that is one of the ways to help things be more  have you seen this visualization before?  Yay!  Cool.  This is a really neat visualization which is also really, really old.  It shows the March on Moscow.  You can see the whole journey.  You can see the number of troops you had at the start.  It's the beige  the beige line.  And you can see it dwindling as this march occurs.  Marching on Moscow and the Russians were pulling back and removing things from the land as they went.  So, a lot of soldiers had trouble not because of fighting, but because of other reasons.
      And so, it’s in the number coming back.  So, you can see him going back the way and the continuation of the dwindle.  And you can pick out interesting points in this visualization.  You can see where a camp split off and suddenly rejoined on the way back and the numbers went up again.  And you can see the temperature over time on the march back.  A few more interesting visualizations.  And I think another really useful way of showing how a visualization can tell you so much more just by how you look at it is can anyone tell me what the  where the one the on the right is located?
      New York, right.  It is very simple because it has that big blank space in the middle which is Central Park.  That's one of the powers of using maps for geographybased information is that you can see where things are.  That's great, huh?  You can see the one in the middle has a very strong visual impact because there are a lot of animals clumped at the top.  This is the life span of those animals.  And you can see the poor lonely tortoise taking a really long time but living for a very long time too.
      The important thing to remember is that if you're making visualization, people aren't going to spend that long looking at it.  You're going to spend a long time making it and they're going to look at it for 10 seconds.  Or not if it's a really beautiful visualization that tells a story.  But just assume that they won't.  Make it as easy as possible to read.  And remember they may just be skimming.
      So, in summary, visualization is great.  But it isn't always accurate, as you've seen.  Think of the visualization you're looking at.  When you see even if it's on the news, because sometimes people just lie.  Sorry, that's a bee in my bonnet.  Stick to conventions if you're making them.  And go ahead and like, look at interesting things on the Internet.  I've got a web page that I'll put up at the end, which is the next slide in case anyone's desperate to leave where I've got some links for anyone interested and you're welcome to come and talk to me.  Thank you for your time.  Do we have time for questions?  Like five minutes for questions if you want to, otherwise I'll go and sit outside and you're welcome to come and talk to me.  And, yeah, I've got some related reading if anyone's interested.  Thank you for joining me on this talk.
      [ Applause ]
      AUDIENCE: Yep.  Do you have any tips for visualizing multivariant data?  The way you can lie with your data is just hide it in some relationship between two variables.
      FEARN: So, the idea is with multiples, rather than having everything in like one visualization, you try to split out meaningful bits into separate visualizations.  And you might end up overlaying things, but it can be helpful.  I would need to look at the data.  Come talk to me afterwards and we can talk about it.
      >> And you have time for more questions.  Okay.  In that case, thank you very much for coming.

