      How to Use Digital Tools to Make Clothes and Shoes
      
      Poppy and Jan Mosbacher
      >> Are by any chance confused?  Still not.  Now?  Still not?  Now I am.  All right.  So, we're in stage B in case you were confused.  This is not any other stage other than stage B.  So, before we get started, just some messages.  Volunteers are still needed.  And if you aren't sure how to do it, go to the information desk.  Particularly the Hoboken crappy robot contest needs help and the swap shop.  And there are talks you plan to attend, you can volunteer in those talks too.
      So, without further ado, we have something exciting here.  It's called how use digital tools to make clothes and shoes by Poppy and Jen Mosbacher.  They have requested that you come up closer to the front if you want to be part of the show and tell.  They're going to have things they're going to pass around.  If you want to get a chance to see those up close as they pass them around, please come over here to the front row areas.
      Not a trick.  We've got here a box full of items to pass around.  So, come closer to the front.  Sorry, can I just correct the announcements from before?
      >> It's not that it needs help, there is one, it's at 7:00 outside of the bar area and Tom Scott is presenting.  There's a side swap in the side bar, and it's bring stuff and swap it.  We need volunteers, particularly for the job that we're doing here.  We've had people on stages all day and they haven't got to see anything yet.  So, it would be nice if people could volunteer to do this job.  Thank you.  Sorry.  Over to Poppy.
      POPPY: Hi, I'm Poppy and today we're going to explore how digital tech could solve some of the problems people have when they make their own clothes and inspire people to make thing that they don't normally make.  It's based on things that Jan and I have been experimenting with and she will show some of the examples.
      As members and extrustees of BuildBrighton makerspace, we're interested in do it together as well as do it yourself.  Some of the tech will be more suitable for shared spaces and others are easy to use at home.  I realize we're talking to a technically advanced group.  So, some of you may already know more about the tech than we do.  Some of the stuff will be familiar.  And others will be completely new.
      And hearing about this stuff in this context might spark ideas and collaboration.  And I'm going to show you some cool tech and also how it could still be improved.  If you have knowledge or  to share or questions to ask, I will be outside afterwards because we have been asked not to do the questions and answers in here.
      So, we're going to cover opportunities for designing clothes, designing and cutting fabric, knitting and sewing, haberdashery, footwear, and making tradition tools to make clothes by hand.  And starting with the design process because that's what researcher Amy Twigger Holroyd says excites and mystifies people who make their own clothes.  It doesn't need to be a mystery anymore.  There are amazing tools to help us visualize ideas.
      Clothes 3D is a garment simulation software that lets you see what clothes will look like before you make them.  You can make alterations without committing because you can just press undo if you don't like it.  It's easy to make changes and see what the effects will be in realtime.
      And there is stress and strain maps, so you can see that the clothes, if they'll fit.  You can add zips, seam allowances, buttons and you can create the patterns that can then be laser cut straight on to fabric or printed to make paper patterns.
      Clo is expensive and a proprietary software, but there's an open source pattern drafting software called the Valenti that project, with 3D tools including NVR.  Here are links for tools for designing clothes.  The other two links are software that you can use for creating knitting and sewing patterns based on your body measurements.
      These kinds of software are even more useful if you have a 3D body scan of yourself.  Because you can design clothes that will fit you perfectly.  A group of us at BuildBrighton makerspace have made a 3D body scanner using Raspberry Pi cameras and put the plans online and it's possible to replicate it for under a thousand pounds with the idea that other makerspaces might want to make one too.  Arthur Guy who helped make it is here at EMF.  Couldn't have done it without him.
      When you buy fabric on the roll, you end up with small pieces that you can't use, and it changes.  Now there are printing companies where you can order your own designs on different fabrics from organza to oil cloth.  They will print several designs on a sheet of fabric, creating less waste.  This fabric was printed by Contrado and there's lots of samples, so you can see the different materials that can be printed on.
      I found it really hard to know what to print when I had a completely blank canvas, so the Adobe Catcher app is great because it turns a photo into a repeating pattern with some surprising results.  So, the Adobe Catcher app uses the camera on the smartphone and you can change the aperture and it can change the pattern.  That is bath mat that creates a pattern like this which could be used for making shower curtains that match.  And then this software is designed from that flower and  yeah.  We love the service that Contrado provides.  We ordered it on Thursday, and it arrived on Friday.  But we liked the idea of doing it ourselves.  We will use companies for the range and convenience and the ability to print photoquality on fabric, but it would be great if in makerspaces we had rolls of white cotton fabric and a printer to experiment with.
      So, BuildBrighton has been donated a large format printer.  And we have been experimenting with printing on fabric.  Once we tricked the machine into accepting the fabric, it worked well.  But the ink ran in the wash.  So, the quilting forums say there's a way to treat it before or after you print it.  And I'm going to try colorfast inks.  I'll share that on my website.  And we have another printer in Devon, there might be other companies that might want to get rid of their printers as they reach the end of their commercial life.
      
      So, Contrado are based in the UK and Spoonflower is based in the US and has lots of other functions where they can print on to patterns and the sorts of clothes that you can already print on to.  But then they shipped to the UK from Berlin.  There's also a company that sells the printers that are designed for printing on fabric.  And that would be really cool to have in makerspaces.  So, cutting fabric is timeconsuming and can be stressful if you're a beginner or a perfectionist.  But accurately cut pattern pieces make if so much easier to sew together, so there could be an advantage to using a laser cutter or a vinyl cutter.  I've had some scary moments cutting fabric with a laser cutter.  It worked best with felt and worst with light fabric that quickly went up in flames.  Soaking the fabric in water before cutting helps prevent fire.  And worked for everything except the netting which melted and Tshirt material which curls up.
      The laser cutter that we use doesn't have a fabric setting, so, we used the paper setting for lighter fabrics and the setting for denim and fabrics.  It would be great if vinyl cutters could be adapted to use on fabric.  They tend to be less expensive to buy and maintain than laser cutters.  And have the potential to cut fullsize pattern pieces that don't fit on most laser cutters.  We tried a rollin vinyl cutter, but it just rucked up the fabric.  I got excited about the cricket maker, which has a rotary blade, this blade.  But it's limited by size because you have to stick it on to a mat that is maximum size of 30x60 centimeters and we couldn't get ours to work.  The customer service was so bad that we ended up sending it back.
      We would love to know if it's possible to hack a rotary blade and use it on a much bigger, better vinyl cutter.  There is a trend for industrial machines to get smaller.  For the fashion industry, it means that instead of mass producing products in the factories, they can make smaller quantities closer to the customers.  And for some items, such as sweaters, mass production might be replaced with mass customization.  Adidas has tested a custom shop, giving customers a fullbody scan and then making jumpers that fit people in four hours.  There's going to be more choice.  And brands are promoting this as empowering the customer to get involved in the design process.  But there still is consumers rather than as makers.  The brands will be in control of how the machines are used.
      If makers were free to use the tools and we could see innovative solutions to problems that businesses don't tackle, smaller industrial machines and digital tools could make the way for  pave the way for textile machines in makerspaces that were previously too big or expensive.  There are already some smallscale knitting machines.  Open Knit started as an open source project.  But has been developed further into a proprietary product called Kniterate.  Knittic is an open source machine that knits in the round and could be good for making scarves.  And old knitting machines are like old line printers which some people hack with computers.  Sara Spencer is giving a talk about that tomorrow.
      Also, embroidery machines are popular in fab labs and hackerspaces.  Especially in America where they seem to be much cheaper.  We bought a secondhand one from America and use it with a transformer.  If you have access to an embroidery machine, turtle stitch is really cool software that's based on the programming language Scratch.  And it turns your code into embroidery pass for your machine.  It's great for children and appeals to both boys and girls.
      This is a demo of using Turtlestitch.  So, you drag and drop bits of code together.  And this is going to make a circle.  So, on the righthand side when we press the green button, it will do it.  And then to make a flower, you just need to add a bit more code.  The pen tool is not a pen, but that's what Scratch calls it.  So, this would actually be the needle.  There are lots of designs that you can download for free.  Which is a great way of seeing how code would come together in different ways.  This simulates what the embroidery machine would do.
      And then this is the finished thing using thread that changes color.  Digital technology can also be used to make the components that are normally bought such as press and buttons.  Here are some 3Dprinted buttons that we made  these aren't 3D printed.  They're made from waste 3D printed PLA and then melted.  Last year I went do a workshop with someone called Julian Carr who is on a mission to reinvent the zipper.  She said even though the zipper was invented in 1851, they're still patented.  Which makes it too expensive for many garment makers in developing countries.  So, she's on a mission to help people come up with an alternative.
      Now on to shoes.  There's a lot of skill in making comfortable shoes, but it's getting easier with 3D printers.  Software and open source designs.  I have been experimenting with 3D printing flipflops which is now circulating from designs on finger vests.  They print quite well in a material called TPU, a flexible filament.  But the soles are too slippery in wet conditions.  The PU stands for polyurethane, which is a common material in shoe making, but it's usually vulcanized which prevents cracking.  I'm not sure if you can vulcanized on a small scale, so it will be interesting to see how long the shoes survive.
      I think the scope for combining 3D printing with traditional processes and gluing on commercial soles or finishing them at a shoe mender's.  I like the Gensolve software which takes a 3D scan of your foot and creates soles that fit perfectly.  Which is demonstrated by this video.
      It sees where the foot and the sole combine and then will remove the material.  And it's free for noncommercial use.  We could also use 3D printing to make laths of a shoe.  It needs to be strong if you want to nail fabric or leather into it.  So, you could make it using polycarbonate.  Alternatively, shoes can be made by wrapping the lath with masking tape, cutting it off and then making a 2D flat pattern.
      So far, the emphasis has been using digital tech to change the process of making clothes and shoes.  But we can also use technology to make tools for doing hand making.  Such as war winders, stitch markers and dress makers dummies.  Most dress makers dummies that you buy are expensive and limited in where you can adjust them to match your body.  People make their own by wrapping themselves in cling film and covering it with duct masking tape.  But it's also possible to make a card board version based on your own 3D body scan, which is why we made the body can scan app based on Raspberry Pi cameras.
      And this one isn't me, it's a 60% model of the model in the clothes software.  And we made it small so that it's easier to transport, but also people who  tailors and dress makers who make 50% models to experiment with ideas.  The full size one of myself which is shown there is covered in matern cloth, which is this stuff.  And it stretches over the model without any seams.  And it makes it easier to stick pins into when you're designing clothes.
      Here is some links for 3D printing buttons.  The instructible for make the PLA buttons.  You can also print to press studs directly on to fabric which are being passed around now and which is done by printing a couple of layers on the 3D printer, causing it, and then putting the fabric on top and then continue printing. 
      We would like to see the tools like this  the ones in this talk combined together to make a complete set that are easy to use.  This would help people start projects and actually finish them.  We would be able to design clothes in VR or on the computer, add color and patterns while on the same screen press "Print" and the machine would print all the pattern pieces and accessories and automatically generate easy sewing or knitting patterns.
      Based on what's already available, this doesn't seem too farfetched.  I think the first step is raising awareness of the tools that are available, because most of this stuff isn't shown on the gadget shows.  And providing opportunities for people to play and experiment with it.  Which is why we're setting up a tech and textile maker
      Space at the community we started in Devon.  We are accumulating tools for textiles that are great for makerspaces or could be hacked to be more suitable for members.  We want to explore the tools and share what we learn with other makerspaces and we're also going to have a mobile makerspace with the equipment for tech and textiles to take to events building on our experiences of doing 3D printing at Glastonbury festival.  Thank you to Jan and others for help.  If you would like to  I have cards to hand out, which might be in my bag.  The cards are printed on fabric and then stuck on to card.  So, the pattern is the  is this pattern that I made from the flower picture that you saw earlier.  But the colors came out less vivid than  on the computer screen.  My website hasn't been updated for a while whilst I've been doing my masters and a fab course on how to make almost anything.  But I have loads more information and all of this I'm going to put online soon in the next couple of weeks.  And I'm hoping to turn this talk into a magazine article.  So, if you have any feedback, please let me know.  Thank you.
      [ Applause ]
      >> She said to take questions outside, but there's actually a few more minutes so we can take them in here and share them.  Does anyone have any questions? 
      AUDIENCE: Hi, Poppy, great talk.  Thank you.  I have a couple much comments.  One was about your trying to laser cut certain materials.  Have you thought about water jet cutting?  Somebody's made a domestic water jet cutter from a pressure washer.  That's hackable, that's doable.
      And I forgot what my second point was. 
      >> That's a great idea.
      AUDIENCE: Someone hacked a pressure washer
      >> I'll have a go at that.
      AUDIENCE: You mentioned something that was rucked up, and something to suck it down.  I was thinking like the air hockey tables, if you made it suck instead of blow, you could suck something to the deck.
      >> Yep, that would be good.
      >> For those on this side, the box over here with all the materials is still being passed around.
      AUDIENCE: Thank you very much for the talk.  I had a question about if you knew if it was possible to maybe generate a mathematical model of sort of like the perfect Tshirt or the perfect trousers and you could just kind of input your size and it would spit out something and then you could get it fabricated or cut.  Are you aware of something like that?
      PO PP Y:  Yes, the link I had up, I think it's freesewing.com.  Someone's done an open source project, you input the measurements and it will alter the pattern design to fit you.  Is that what you mean?
      AUDIENCE: Yes, that's right.  Great.  Thank you very much.
      >> Anymore questions?  Here you go.
      AUDIENCE: Hi.  I saw a few years ago that someone developed a sprayon fabric and I think is like fibers that kind of stick together to make a feltlike material.  I was wondering if you do your body scan and make the card board model, could you spray on sprayon fabric and not bother with cutting or stitching.
      POPPY:  Yes 
      >> You can do that.
      POPPY:  A friend of mine used that to make bras.  Because it molds around your body really well.  We found in the UK how to get hold of that stuff.
      >> AUDIENCE MEMBER: It might be researchonly currently.
      JAN: We contacted the company and they were providing it to universities.  But they weren't just doing it for ordinary people.
      AUDIENCE: The makerspace wish list, then.
      POPPY:  Yeah.  That would be good.
      >> Anymore questions?  So, give them both a big round of applause.  Thank you, again.
      POPPY:  Thank you.
      [ Applause ]
      >> And, again, volunteers are needed at stages.  If anyone is interested, go to the information desk or pop on to the back to the people who are doing the audio tech and tell them you would like to volunteer.  Or her.  If you can find her.  She's a moving target.

