      The Battle of Mosul:  What does it mean to live in a postGeneva Convention World?
      
      Emily Mayhew 
      
      >> Hello.  And welcome to stage B.  I would like to introduce the speaker in a couple of minutes.  First, there'll be some announcements.  First of all,  electromagnetic Field is run by volunteers.  You can sign up at the green room if you want to make the festival more amazing than it is already.  You can do an hour at the bar or spend an hour doing the audio or video recording of some of the talks.  All the volunteering we have is on site.  So, it doesn't take much time.  You don't need to travel anywhere.  So, these sign up.
      Secondly, we would like to hear your feedback, what you think about EMF.  Go to EMFcamp.org/feedback, what you think about the talks or what you have to improve the festival for next year.  So, go and leave your feedback.  Thirdly, there will a crap you robots competition tonight at 7 p.m. outside the bar.  The bar is just behind this tent.  You can sign up at the info tent and enter your robot into the competition.
      And finally, at the Cy Bar tonight, there will be an old tech swap.  Has anybody brought their old tech here?  Like old gadgets that you would like to swap with somebody else?  Raise your hand.  Any old tech?  Okay.  Nobody.  But you can still go there and walk away with someone else's old tech stuff.  Even if you don't bring your own.  It will be at the Cy Bar tonight.  Okay.  Those are all the announcements.
      Now I would like to introduce Dr. Emily Mayhew from Imperial College and she'll talk about the Battle of Mosul:  What does it mean to live in a postGeneva Convention world.
      EMILY: Can you hear me?  I haven't got a power point, so, I should get a gold star for that.  Apparently, that doesn't work.  Anyway.  I am  I have a slightly weird position at Imperial.  I have a colleague here.  I have to be careful what I say.  I'm a historian and I work in bioengineering at Imperial and say a lot of times to people working on complex casualty.  It's all happened before.  Much like the speaker before me talked about banking crisis from nearly a thousand years ago, it's all happened before.  There is nothing that is surprising.  The Internet is helpful, but it hasn't reached the power and impact of the Catholic church.  I'm happy that the previous speaker supported me if that.
      I'm going to talk about something really depressing.  I don't know how many of you did your O levels.  If you did a history DCSE you may have noticed, or not, that if you studied war in the 20th century, the battles all have names and all that dates.  So, you kind of know that the battle of the sun took place in 1916.  You might have a sense of 191418 is the first World War.  193945 is the second World War.  We hit the 21st century and it's much more difficult.  And indeed, in the last quarter of the 20th century, it's difficult for people to say exactly when the Vietnam War began and ended.  They might know the Tet offenses, don't know who one it.  War is a less specific thing.  We tend not to know their name and we tend not to know their dates.
      I'm not going to complain about that necessarily, but I would like to add one more name and date to the cannon of wars you have in your head.  And that is the Battle of Mosul.  The Battle of Mosul, if you do an image search, it's one of the reasons I don't have a PowerPoint.  I want you to pay attention to what I'm telling you.  But if you see the Battle of Mosul, it's almost like everything else in urban conflicts in the 21st century.  But Mosul is different, and everything changed at Mosul.  And here is why.  The name is Mosul, mosul.  In northern Iraq in the Nineveh Province.  The city itself used to be called Nineveh.  It's in the Bible.  And everyone is warmed up by a thousand years from the previous speaker.  He spent 70% of his time not on theoretical physics and mathematics, but trying to date the Revelations, Newton.  And a big and important part of revelations happens at Nineveh, and in 2014, ISIL, ISIL they're saying ISIL now.  ISIL were active in Iraq and took over Mosul.  That was the point at which their dominance was highlighted.  They captured Mosul in 2014 and they would hold it until 2016.
      A period of extreme trauma for the inhabitants of Mosul.  Those that could get out ahead of it, 3 million inhabitants.  Second largest this year in Iraq.  And those who could get out, the religious minorities, but it became difficult.  And I.S.I.S. was brutal.  And they went in and implemented a regime we know about from the news.  They implemented a formal religious state.
      Men and women were no longer allowed to mix.  Death was a daily occurrence inflicted on people.  Most of the hospitals were closed down.  Men and women and medical staff were segregated according to gender.  And at the basic level all the maternity levels, all the units and the capability that were providing medical care for pregnant women and their children were simply closed down.  That ceased to be a meaningful activity in Mosul under ISIS.  They closed the medical student.  The medical students in Mosul, it had a big medical school.  Iraq has an old and networked medical schools.  They fled, they were able to take the final examinations if they didn't.  But if they didn't, they were taken into the field hospital that I SIS opened for fighters.  And the female medical students were expelled, and it was a death sentence being a member of the medical school.  And their remaining degree came about trauma care.  The medical students treated patients who came in who were ISIS fighters.  And some of the citizens.  Mostly the male citizens.
      I pay attention to this because I teach in the medical school and I worry about students who aren't ready to take their fourth year exams.  About students that aren't going to graduate.  The ISIS medical students stuck in Mosul during that period have not been allowed to complete their medical degrees and we still don't really know what to do with them.  Nobody's made up their mind what's going to happen to them.  They have some extraordinary skills.  They may have been influenced.  We don't know.  We need to take those issues.  That's a small decision.
      They need to take some much, much bigger decisions after Mosul.  Because this is why everything changed at Mosul.  In 2016, an alliance was put together, Kurdish forces, Iraqi forces, eventually US forces and other forces to take back Mosul.  That was a mass allied army on one side of the river pushing to besiege and recapture an occupied time.  New forms of warfare are supposed to not be as organized as that.  But you can look at the battle for Mosul.  The besieging of Mosul and the recapture of Mosul almost in terms of the first World War.  You can certainly compare it with Stalingrad.  The battle begins as the allies assemble.
      And everybody knows what's going to happen.  Everybody knows that things are very dire in Mosul and that not only will there be widespread bloodshed from the forces that are going to engage there, but there are going to be a real problem with refugees.  Refugees who are injured.  And at this point, a third party normally comes into play.  The NGOs, led by the international Committee of the Red Cross, come into the geographical area of the battlefield and set up their program delivery points.
      Mostly trauma injury points.  They are providing a supplement.  And they're providing the provisions.  They're instituting the provision for the injured refugees or indeed anybody that comes out of Mosul who is injured.  Whatever side they are on.  That is the point about the International Committee of the Red Cross.  International Committee of the Red Crescent.  I'm going to call them ICRC, that's what I'm talking about.  This is important.  I hope you're getting the message that Mosul is important.
      The first time in the history, since 1659, the International Committee of the Red Cross declined to attend at Mosul.  This is the end of our definition of modern warfare.  It begins in 1859 where the principle of a neutrality, a thirdparty on the battlefield is established at the battle.  It is instituted in 1613.  Three in Geneva with the evolution of the Red Cross.  And signed up to by most of the world's governments by 1864.  And we have relied on it ever since.
      It is part of our DNA.  It's part of our cultural memory.  That a little white flag with a red cross on it means casualties.  And you don't shoot where that flag is being flown.  There are, of course, a number of occasions  many occasions where you can think of where neutrality has not been respected.  But it has always been formally assumed.  The International Committee of the Red Cross has been able to talk to both sides.
      And they have brought  as time went on from 1864 they broadened their way if that third space on battlefields.  They became deciding how people are evacuated.  How corridors are put into battlefields to get out refugees.  They have become about prisoner exchanges and observing prisoners of war and making sure that the terms of the Geneva Convention, the convention that all the nations signed up to at the end of the 19th century are observed.  And holding those to account who do not.  And by and large, that is what they did up until the Battle of Mosul.  Where they formally declined to provide a presence on the battlefield.
      It is the end of civilization in warfare as we know it.  And that's why we need to understand why Mosul is so important.  Why did they do it?  They did it because in a report that followed Mosul, neutrality was precluded in this space.  There simply was no way for them to be neutral.  If they were going to send in their staff, they were going to have to go in with units from the alliance, from the Iraqis, from the Kurds, from the US and from the small mounted UK forces.  Then to send staff in, embedded or even informally part of those troops immediately means that they are no longer neutral.  They were simply unable to communicate with ISIL in Mosul.
      They were simply unable to establish two battle lines.  And as they were unable to do that, they simply withdrew.  The Geneva Convention lies at the heart of what the ICRC does.  It is the very definition of their identity.  They now face some really difficult questions about where they go after Mosul.  What happened at Mosul, there was what is now termed the provider of last resort.  The WHO was going to be there anyway.  The difference between the ICRC and the WHO in very simplistic terms, I'm a historian so I keep it simple, I take a very long view.  WHO does primary health care and diseases.  They inoculated children against diphtheria, preventing an enormous disease catastrophe there.  Communicable diseases are the WHO.  When they fly their flag, go into medical aid posts and mission posts, they're not providing trauma care, they're providing primary health care.  Obstetrics, epidemiology.  The ICRC, the ICF, other organizations, but in particular the ICRC do trauma care, wound care.  They weren't at Mosul.
      The WHO were designated the provider of last resort and asked to find a solution rapidly as the coalition advanced to take the city.  And the crisis that everybody anticipated was in its bloody horror.  Nobody overestimated Mosul.  It was deadly as they expected it to be.  The WHO doesn't have trauma capability.  They provided as they could and sent the staff they could.  And for the first time they drew on, it's not a very good term, so, I need to do it better, the for profit nonprofits.  There are nonprofit humanitarian organizations that do that stuff for money.
      They are profitable nonprofits.  Mainly they have been created to go in after natural disasters.  And in particular, the creation of these organizations was stimulated by the tsunami in Indonesia and earthquakes.  It looks at a range of for profit nonprofit and call in three particular organizations.  These organizations do okay.  I'll talk a little bit about  yeah.  But they make things even more complicated.  There are three of them.  The one that I know best is an organization called NYC medics.  They've all got really, really good websites.  Please go and look at them.  They're very clear and very cool and they spell out what they do.  But remember, they are a for profit nonprofit.  NYC medics I have a base for them.  I have a great friend working there.  They tend to be exmilitary, trained paramedics and firemen.  My friend came from Baghdad, I had a quick chat with him in London about Mosul, and now he's at a new post in California.  He's not been replying to emails.  He's fighting fires in California and doesn't know when he's going to be able to look at the emails again.
      He's a trained paramedic and went with NYC Medics to Mosul.  The tagline is when the world hurts, we're there.  And then Aspen medical.  They're not from Aspen, they're from Australia.  Which would have been helpful.  There may be an Aspen in Australia.  They provide obstetric care.  Care for prenatal and nearnatal care.  They go as a response for the pregnancy and health care needs of very small infants.  And they were called in because the emergency in Mosul for the women who just had babies was understood.
      And the third one, this is where it really gets complicated is another US organization, Samaritan's Purse.  They are an effective organization, but they are also evangelical.  If you are taken to their units, they will tend your wounds and preach the Christian gospel in a reasonable but reasoned manner.  And we are talking about Mosul and layers of complication that nobody saw coming.  A really great organization in Boston, the Johns Hopkins, it's called the Center for Humanitarian Health knew that was problematic.  They went straight out, and they did a report and tried to examine firstly how successful this response, this cobbledtogether response had been and what the meaning of the ICRC formally declining for the first time to be in the geographical area of a battle zone would really mean.
      What the three commercial organizations were particularly good at was going and talking to the people who were doing the report quickly.  Aspen in particular, very good at marketing.  Are very good at stating their case.  And they went in and they made  they gave the authors of the report access to their documentation, to their outcome studies and they talked to them a great deal.  It's a very smart thing to do when you're trying to define a new commercial space.  Talk to the guys.  Don't hide.  Don't talk to the guys doing the report, you come out of it looking good if you talk.  And the International Red Cross in particular, briefly at Mosul, but withdrew very rapidly were extremely resentful that the organizations were there and didn't talk to the authors of the report quickly enough.
      I'm a historian.  Talk to the authors of the report.  Because at some point a historian is going to come along and make judgments about what's written down there.  If you don't tell people what happened, we'll never know.  We'll get it wrong with lectures.  They have some explaining to do.  It would be not because they did wrong, but because we just like to understand their decisionmaking process better.
      Mosul is important because it redefines the humanitarian space.  We need to work out what things  once the Geneva Convention had been put back in its box, chances are it isn't going to be able to get out of its box in the same format again.  I'm not sure how that works, but you know roughly what I need.  The idea of neutrality is not what it us used to be.  The linking of the humanitarian in the space is broken.  We need to design what we're going to do about these conflicts going forward.  People need to meet a big office in the United Nations or in Geneva overlooking the big lake and decide what their identity is.  Mosul is not an anomaly.  It's war for the foreseeable future.  We can no longer bring the resources in the form that we always thought we would be able to bring to them.
      We have some hard thinking to do.  I don't know if the really big institutions are capable of that.  And that's why I've come to places like this because there might be somebody here who is in a unique position to do some of that thinking.  To reconceptualize  oh, 10.  Okay.  To reconceptualize the relationship between neutrality and humanitarianism.  To take the leap that maybe neutrality is gone.  That's it.  We don't live in a world where it's possible anymore and how do we adapt?  Do we need a more pragmatic definition of neutrality or a more pragmatic definition of humanitarian activity?  Yes, I think we do.  It's about accepting, as Jimmy Carter said in the "New York Times," rather than a brutal war.  These are big decisions that face us all.  If you could think of that next time you see a little regular flag with an even smaller red cross, it's changed forever and adjust your thinking.  Because it starts in places like this.  Thank you very much.  Ten minutes for questions.
      [ Applause ]
      >> Does anybody have any questions for Emily?
      AUDIENCE: It's maybe a dumb question.
      EMILY: No dumb questions in this space.
      AUDIENCE: There's been a lot of wars against pretty radical people.  What makes Mosul so different?  Why suddenly neutrality changed?  About the why?
      EMILY: Because there is a formal declaration by the ICRC that they're not coming.  I don't know.  And I don't quite understand the decisionmaking process.  Because, again, why was that different from some of the stuff that was going on earlier in Iraq and earlier on in Syria?  Why there was a tipping point at Mosul is something that we don't understand.  And, again, I would like to understand this.  Because I think the ICRC being able to understand their own process is going to lead to their own solution.
      But it literally is this  although informally they have withdrawn from other places, they are formally active almost  at that point, they were formally active in war zones all over the world.  But Mosul is  it's not just a tipping point, it is a formal declaration.  And to go that far without being able to provide an alternative, without saying we will be there in a different form.  Actually, not to be there.  They are there further back.  Obviously, there are huge ICRC points in the refugee camp network.  There were a million people who leave Mosul.  But to formally say we won't be on the battlefield, that's the tipping point.  I focus on that because I'm a historian.  Because I want people to remember this one change.
      So, I've identified  in a way this is kind of my marketing.  I've identified this as the Battle of Mosul 2016, the end of modern humanitarian engagement with warfare as we know it as a point to make people understand this.  Otherwise it's too blurred.  It's big urban conflicts in the Middle East that nobody understands the difference.  Mosul is formal.  Practically, not much difference.  Yes.  Sorry.
      AUDIENCE: So, my question was more about the role of organizations like the Red Cross going in.  Because I know with humanitarian aid sometimes it's prolonged conflict.  So, as a historian, it would be interesting  have there been cases where having someone like this prolongs and there's speculation that it could have ended sooner if there was.  Do you know what I mean?  Even by taking a neutral stance, the outcome is not neutral.
      EMILY: And the idea is there is a concept of neutrality.  It's like medieval chivalry.  We think of Knights in armor and ladies with handkerchiefs.  And this makes war more palatable.  This is difficult to achieve.  And they were able to get access to German Nazi prisoner of war camps.  They were not able to get access to concentration camps.  That's not a military association.  They weren't able to get access in Japan.  If they file a report saying once again we're requesting to the Japanese embassy that we get access and it's been denied.
      we don't know what's going on there.  So, there is an idea of perfect neutrality that no one has indeed ever achieved.
      I think it's a more complex case to make that they've ever prolonged wars, but there's always been this very clear ideal of neutrality that sat there.  That's what they're aiming for.  It's always nice to have an ideal to aim for.  And that there are going to be these three tracks along which war goes.  One side, the other side and the neutral parties in the middle.  And so, I don't  we should always assume that there is no thing as perfect neutrality, but what there is now is no ideal of neutrality.  What do we do where we live in a world where we have to set aside a big ideal?  That is almost a philosophy question.  But it's certainly an institution question.  It's ethics and medical questions.  The ICRC picks up those in no man's land, no matter the uniform, man, woman or child and treat them and send them on.  That has been fatally compromised.
      AUDIENCE: The impression you gave in what you said 
      EMILY: Sorry, I have to not go past
      AUDIENCE: The impression I got from what you said is the ICRC had to withdraw because it would be embedded in the allied forces.  Why was the ICRC not able to open a dialogue with ISIS, whatever going to call them?  And it's not really the Red Cross there, it was the Red Crescent.  What was the issue?  What was ISIL's problem with ICRC.
      EMILY: I'm lumping them together.
      AUDIENCE: You switched to Red Cross as well.  It really matters in this context.
      EMILY: I think it doesn't matter.  If there was a Red Crescent person, there was no speaking so ISIL.  There was a command structure, but not developed enough where you can go, the Red Cross, ICRC, were able to institute their mission delivery points as they had done in previous conflicts.  It's a different case in Syria because you can talk to someone on both sides, can't talk to all of them.  The bottom line is you can't talk to ISIL.
      AUDIENCE: Can you talk to ICRC?
      EMILY: I'm not sure you could say it that clearly.  There was no point where you could say this is the command point.  This is the tip of where if we have a conversation with these people in Mosul, this will spread along the entire ISIL command structure.  It was simply not that formal.
      AUDIENCE: But the ideal logical of the caliphate saying we reject anything outside of the caliphate.
      EMILY: Nothing as coherent as that.  Yes.  Absolutely.  Absolutely.  Exactly.  Exactly.  We embedded  which is an issue  which is not an issue for the other organizations because they don't have this principle of  it's almost an identity.  It's not almost an identity issue, it is an identity issue.  When you're talking to ISIL or whoever they are, whoever that grouping is, it's simply not possible to talk to them in the same way that we've always been able to do.  It's easier to talk to the Taliban.  Taliban you can talk to.  But it's  I'm not sure how we come to this.  But we can talk about that later.  But, no, it's as if somebody  you're going somewhere to speak French and they're doing a mime.  It's not even a different language.  It's an entirely context.
      Yes.
      AUDIENCE: [ Away from microphone ]
      EMILY: I will not interrupt the crappy robots.  Yeah.  Thank you very much.
      [ Applause ]

