      A Failure Enthusiast (Partial)
      
      	John Thurmond
      
      >> Showing up, they tried it.  And then I started live streaming it on Facebook, and even though I told my neighbors I was livestreaming  they didn't maybe know what livestreaming was  they were willing to come up and fail in front of the camera and try this for the first time.  It made me think, we're on to something here, if you show up, make an environment safe to fail in and encourage people.  They want to learn.  Most importantly was this.  And this is my 13yearold boy who is on the slack line, out in the front yard.  A typical 13yearold, out in public.  Who is smiling.  Okay.  Now, I'm on to something.  And I will tell you, this is my entire goal.
      Forget the talk and everything else.  If I can make my own child smile about failure, I've done something right.  So, it's conveniently located right by the bar and the first aid station.
      [ Laughter ]
      This location for a variety of reasons, you can see the  very handy.  And what I wanted to do is I want you to come here and I want you to try it out.  And I want you to try it for the first time.  My challenge to you is this, don't be like me.  Don't be afraid to video your first time at failing.  I want to livestream this on Twitter and try it for the first time.  It's not that hard.  You will probably not hurt yourself.  And if you do, there's a convenientlylocated first aid station.  But I'm going to step up a of this.  [no audio]  so, as of yesterday  [no audio]  most people , so for the livestreaming, thanks to everyone who did it.  livestream failure.  But with this, they did it and they're encouraging people to go along and get positive feedback.  Conveniently, and they have  every time somebody steps off, you can see the smile on their face.  They're done.  What you have to do is try to replicate this environment in your own lives.  Go out there.  Encourage failure and encourage  thank you very much.  We have a little bit of time for questions.
      [ Applause ]
      >> I don't think we've got the box.  Over there!  Right.  There we go.  All right.
      AUDIENCE: I definitely connect with what you said.  When I was  I decided that I would have fun and slide, you know  which is on the Internet.
      JOHN: Probably your best ever, right?
      AUDIENCE: And actually  when you have a video on the Internet that  where you are doing something, there's nothing you can do much to make yourself look more stupid.  So, you can try anything, it doesn't matter.  You'll never look  that video everybody has seen.
      JOHN: And I think these days, everybody has that video.
      AUDIENCE: It may be private.
      JOHN: You may not be aware of it, if somebody else has it.  Everybody has video cameras.  You have a safety net, everyone has done something stupid on the Internet.
      AUDIENCE: Exactly.  But  part of an organization where I'm an assessor, and at the end of the assessment all of the people don't do exactly what is required exactly the right way.  But sometimes I will still pass them with like a 20minute session of here is what you didn't do or should have done differently and here's how to do it better.
      And the main thing is about the  the reason why I do that, is I believe they didn't do the one way because they failed, but because they were  you know, there's the stress.  There's the you're being watched by someone who is judging you.  And I think the judging bit is really important to people.  When you feel you have been judged, you really don't want to fail.  For me, it's judging, are you capable of this in general?  Do I have the feeling, yes, right now you didn't do that bit well?  But it's because of the stress and in the end  had that been my mum, would  no, she wouldn't have.  That's one environment where I'm trying to do better in a way.  You failed but doesn't mean you failed.  You're still passing.
      JOHN: We need to figure that out.
      AUDIENCE: And the question is more on a daytoday basis, obviously this is not a makerspace, like maker thing  at anything in life in general, not just trying to build things.  What would your recommendation be for anyone in your daily life, how to create that safe space in people and help encourage them at being okay at failing at something, et cetera?
      JOHN: I think you hit on exactly the point which is don't judge them for failing to do something.  Encourage them to continue even though they failed, right?  And that's really what makes the difference in these environments is it has to be okay to fail in whatever endeavor you do.  And do we have any teachers here today?  Thank you.  This is a really hard environment to engineer in the classroom.  Really hard.  Because the whole classroom environment is around passing and failing.  And here in the UK you go through these pretty horrific exams that everybody goes through at the end where you either pass or you fail, basically.  There is no learning from failure.  Maybe there is, but it's a very harsh, judgey environment.  How can we do that?
      >> Anymore questions?  Keep your hands up.  You at the camera, right.
      AUDIENCE: This might be in the comments there, just wondering  [no audio]  or embarrassing  this is a whole thing is when you get to the end  is that  have you thought about this sort of process in retrospect?  In probably all of the  and the learning environment, that's probably the toughest.  And it's not really engineered to be an enjoyable learning experience.  You learn by failures, but it's hard  that gets you there.
      JOHN: No, you're absolutely right.  And it's taken me to get to a fairly advanced state in my academic career before I was willing to talk about failure.  And I do this in scientific talks now.  I talk about failure.  And I would say when I came out of my Ph.D., I was probably somewhere on the opposite end of the spectrum.  When you're trying to get a job and all of these things and you finish.  And you have been in this environment where failure is okay as long as you get through some test.  It's really hard to get yourself in the mindset that failure is okay.
      This is why I'm out in the scientific community now talking about this and encouraging people.  And doing it myself.  I talk about my failures so that other people can learn from it.  And then if I can snatch success from that, I will talk about that as well.
      >> Okay.  Time for one very, very quick question.
      AUDIENCE: I was just going ask about Ben Goldacre who is on a campaign to get drug companies to publish their failed things and the realworld consequences of that that, you know, multiple attempts to prove something works and that, you know, if they don't publish their failures, then there's a realworld consequence for medical research.
      JOHN: Yeah.  I think that's an excellent example.  Because what do they have to lose from doing that?  Not very much.  Maybe some idea of perceives, or how people view them.  We know drug companies test things that didn't work.  And if that's a database of things that don't work and how they didn't work and why, this helps people develop better drugs.  This is really important.  And neighbor there are secrecy reasons to that end, but I think there's a huge opportunity too.  If we're willing to talk about it.
      >> Okay.
      [ Applause ]
      Coming up next in this tent we have the amazing Lydia Kostopoulos saying it's a magical time to be alive, and it really is.  But there are talks going on all over.  Look at the schedule, look up there.  If you have not yet volunteered, volunteer.  It gives you a wonderful, healthy glow and everyone likes you when you do it. 
      >>
      >> [Break]

