Augmented Hilarity by Lydia Nicholas. 
>> Hello, everyone. I'm ready to announce the next talk. Before we start, a new messages. We still need volunteers for the bar shift tonight. To remind you all, after 11 pm, no loud music any more. And we would like your feedback. You can give anonymous feedback on the EMF feedback website. Now, we are going to have a talk about augmented hilarity with Anna, Lydia, and Scary! Thank you very much! [Applause]. 
>> Hello. Thank you for coming. This isn't a talk, sorry if you came for a talk. We are here to tell you some jokes! About science and tech and nerdy thing. Is that all right? Amazing. This is how tonight's going to work. My name is Anna. I'm a materials scientist. I will show you my full name for the full branding effect, Anna Ploszajski. If you're wondering about the spelling of that, you're right, "Anna" is a palindrome. Welcome to the gig where palindrome is a punch line. We're here to tell you about science and tech and nerdy stuff. My name is, I've got a PhD in building hide general systems for hide general powered cars. It's in university city - it renders my PhD as about as useful as most of the consonants in my surname. I have a PhD. I'm proud of this fact. The reason I did a PhD was the same reason that anyone ever does a PhD, which is to be able to call yourself "doctor" at the end of it. When anyone calls me up, is that Miss or Mrs? I'm, "Like, actually, it is Dr". I get letters through the post-and addressed to Ms poll poll poll. Return to - that person is dead. She does not exist any more. It got confusing during the world pup. The commentators would be like, he misses. I would say, actually, it is doctor! The reason I'm so proud of using my PhD credentials is I had to wade through a steaming pile of Patriarchy for four years before being able to call myself doctor mainly due to one particular person we will call Dickhead Dave. One thing he first said to me is you're only here because of the size of your boobs. Right? Wow. . It is automobile false because having boobs in a lab is detrimental to doing experiments, as I would later find out. You would be walking around, and then like suddenly magnetic objects would just stick to your underwire. You would be trying to do an experiment and a clamp stand would be over here. It is very difficult to do experiments with someone that wears a bra in a lab. He was wrong on the front that women can't do science. He and his two coney, Twat Face Tim and Misogynist Mike, they isolated me from everybody at work. I redownloaded an old version of Microsoft office 97 so I could chat to Clippy. We did our PhDs together in our lonely spot in the lab. One day, I got an email from my lab supervisor, my industrial sponsor who works elsewhere, saying would like to work with us at the Space Centre in Florida? Great! So I was, like, I fired an email. I said, "Dear Professor Supervisor." Clip which was, "Looks like you're writing a letter." Not now, I have to concentrate. "I read with interest your invitation to come and work at the NASA Kennedy space centre. I have one outstanding question. How soon can you get me out of this shithole? Yours somewhat desperately. Anna Ploszajski. PS, please note the spelling." I was touching down soon after in Orlando Florida. I've never been anywhere like that. My family holidays were less Orange County and more orange squash. Less Bahamas, more pyjamas. I was excited to be there. There were three women. To manage - imagine that! Full of people of only one gender! I can't imagine what would look like! I can, it is every lab. There was Olivia who was the lab tech. We got on really, really well because we were a similar age and bonded over our mutual love of the Spice Girls. JUju who said nothing the time I was there because she was scared of our boss called Formidable Alison. The best way that I can describe Formidable Alison is like the Margaret Thatcher of chemistry, except with more Americanisms and less sex appeal. Award yourself a bonus nerd point if you laughed at that joke because Margaret Thatcher is the Margaret Thatcher of chemistry, having studied it at university! But anyway, I was there for three weeks. On my first day, Olivia gave me a tour. She showed me these beautiful spotless labs which were the polar opposite of the horrible dirty physics dungeon that I was used to back in London. And, on my tour, she showed me this massive coffee machine that they had. I was like, "That's a nice coffee machine! Where's the kettle?" She looked at me blank ed face ... "Kettle? What's that like? For tea? You British are just like the Queen!" America is such a foreign country sometimes! On my second day, I got a tour of NASA's biology labs. This is this enormous room, like four times the size of this tent, and these huge aluminium - sorry aluminum - chambers that you can control everything - temperature, humidity, the colour the lights. They were doing plant experiments in these chambers. In the first one, they were shaking these plants around, like vibrating them. The guide said they were doing this to see how big the plant would grow given the trauma of space light. If you want trauma, spend five minutes in the physics dungeon! Therapy for - another one of these chambers, all the lights were off but we peered in through the little window. I shit you not, this is a real thing that happened to me at NASA. There was an octopus in a tank of water. And the guide slammed the door shut and said, "You didn't see that!" I think I might have seen the next President of the United States! Being grown in a lab in NASA. I think it's going to get much better from here on in! Life in Florida was amazing. The incredible wildlife. I would see dolphins on my way to work. My experiment is working! That never happened! My experiments were working! Yes! I was even starting to crack the miserable Alison. I really mean that, now, whenever we walked into the lab together, instead of letting the door slam back in my face, she would hold it open for me like a normal person. So that was all rather nice. But as the days kind of went into weeks, those familiar feelings of loneliness that I was used to kind of started to creep back in because my own friend out there was Olivia, the lab tech, and she had her own life going on, and so she said. Maybe she realised I wasn't Baby Spice after all. I took myself off to see 50 shades of grey on my own at the cinema. 50 Shades of Grey was not the documentary about steel alloys that I was expecting! I was scarred for life! One weekend, I went to the NASA Kennedy Space Centre visitor centre where they keep their old rockets and Space Shuttle s and stuff. There is no sadder site than a grown woman in her 20s going like this in front of photographer of a rocket taking off while a professional photographer takes her photo on her own! I bought a mug and drank shit tea out of it from boiled water on the hob. Towards my stay in NASA, we decided to Skype back to the UK to tell them our results. During the Skype conversation, they told us that they had done more calculations, and now our goalposts for our work in the you US had shifted. I had to translate to formidable Alison and tell her that the hoops had moved, or however the fuck basketball works! All too soon, I was back on the flight to London, and I was back in the lab on the Monday morning. I had to stop calling it the dungeon lab because 50 Shades gave me confusing feelings about dungeons. Here was I, right? I might have been a woman in science, but I was a woman in science who had worked at NASA. I was feeling kind of confident. I don't have to be bullied by you guys any more, Dickhead Dave et al! And I was feeling all good about myself. Dickhead Dave smashed my NASA mug as soon as I got back and bullied me for four years until I got my PhD and left! I did get it, which was the main thing. I'm going to introduce to you our next act. They are an incredible physicist and performer, all sorts of different ways of communicating physics which is the hardest one to communicate, I reckon. So, please, give them extremely warm welcome, please welcome to the stage Scary Boots! [Applause]. My name is scary, yes an adjective, yes, we all livelihood through the 1990s, apart from those of us who didn't. Don't get worked up by having a weird name. It's okay. So, today, I thought I would ruin romance for you. Through the medium of science and technology. So, what is more romantic than a diamond? Diamond symbols of love - diamonds because they're so scarce and rare, like proper, proper interaction with a proper interaction and connection with a human being. You can make your own diamonds with explosions. This is how the Soviets made diamonds. You can make nanodiamonds which I'm paid to study nanoscience so contractually to say that's the best kind of diamond. You can make them with a load of TNT. As the blast front pushes out, it crushes the carbon in the environment between the blast front in the air and you get five-nanometre nanodiamond. Maybe explosions anti-aren't always the solution. Maybe not every relationship should start with a bang. Maybe some should be allowed to grow, because you can grow diamonds in a lab, right? You've got to get carbon and put it under the right temperature and pressure - you can get carbon from anywhere, soot, barbecues, dead pets. If you keep that at the right temperature and pressure, you can grow a diamond. That's a problem if you're a diamond company because somehow people can make the thing that you sell really cheaply. They're trying to convince us that only mined diamonds really truly express love because there's nothing like being kept background ground at high pressure for millions of years, and then did you go up and polished so you can be a status symbol. Nothing like that that represents a relationship. My relationship is more like lab-grown diamonds in that I constantly monitor it and make graphs. That's my partner over there. He likes the graphs too! Constantly monitoring to make graphs - where was I going with this? Diamonds are also hard and they endure. Also, we want that in a relationship, don't we? But diamonds can be shattered with hammers, burned with blow torches. If you burn diamonds, get enough oxygen to it. Antoine Lavoisier managed to burn a diamond with a tank of oxygen and a magnifying glass. If you've got a wedding ring you don't want any more, that is your next weekend's project. I don't know, islands, they have - diamonds have a reputation for being forever. Like I said, it's just atoms. If you leave carbon long enough it will form the least energetic phase it can, graphite what you get in pencil leads. Soon, after a couple of million years, that will be a big pencil lead on your finger. According to Marilyn Monroe, diamonds are friendly. I would contest this. In some places, diamonds are used to fuel war and pay child soldiers which I guess let those children get out and meet new people. Maybe a bit friendly. They're transparent and infrared so you can see your friend's heat signature through them. That's why they use them on the noses of heat-seeking missiles. As they come bouncing over to you, like over explosive enthusiastic metal puppies, the lasting you see is a diamond. Kind of friendly? I will give it a half score. But, yes. Overall, I think not the romantic implements they've been made out to be. You're all geeks thinking I never fell for that consumerist conformist rubbish anyway. I believe in proper romance, in intimate personal relationships. I'm going to ruin that too! Because I want to tell you a story about a really cute story that's been going around since it was first told on Radio Lab, do we know the Voyager probes? I know you do, like, if you've seen what he likes like, that's funny, if not, check him out later! Not like that. Sorry, Adam! So, Voyager probes, furthest things from earth. Voyager 1 is 13.3 billion miles away from the sun. Beyond from the influence of the solar system now. It is going out into space. On that, we've placed a mix tape. Because NASA in the 1970s! And we made a gold record. Gold so it doesn't tarnish in space. It is not that we wanted to flash the cash. And we got Carl Sagan to work on his mix tape. He was the director on this promising, and there was a warm called Adrienne who was the creative director. They are working to put together with other people a disk that would represent the entirety of life on earth. It looked like this. They were putting together sounds and pictures, languages from ancient Arcadian to ... English. The sentiment of a mother's kiss, all sorts of things. On the right-hand side, it's someone who has learned to drink exclusively through Ikea instruction books. So, I don't know what the world is going to make of that when they find it. So we put this sort of thing on, and Anne and Carl are trying to find the last piece of music they need to represent us to anybody who is listening. They are looking for a piece of Chinese music. She calls Carl and says sag like, "I've found the perfect thing" and leaves a message on a voice mail. Carl calls her back. Ann doesn't tell us what happened during that conversation because she's got at that right to privacy. During that 90 minutes, they start off as colleagues but end up engaged. People say, this is so romantic. Bloody stupid is what it is! It's inadequately researched! I took longer choosing my vacuum cleaner than that! Did they even read the reviews? Did they check if their ports were compatible? Call themselves researchers! I am shocked. But that's not the worst thing about this. The worst thing about this - did she even know if his breath smells? That would be an issue if you got engaged to someone before you even kiss them. But that's not the worst thing. The worst thing is he is already married at this point. He's got a seven-year-old son. I'm not old-fashioned enough to think that marriages should only be between two people, but I do think that you should tell other people before you invite them into the marriage and get everybody's agreement on that. Marriage are like showers. You should know everyone who is in one with you otherwise it gets creepy. That's not even the worst bit, right? They record the brain waves of this woman the next day, and she's thinking about the fact she's met the man she's going to fall in love with, even though he's already married, and these brain waves get recorded and sent into space. We've sent into space this picture, and a woman going, "Yes, sure, man, 90 minutes of talk, that's fine. That seems like a basis to correct my life based on." What message are the aliens going to take interest this? 90 minutes of sweet talk, and they're anybody's. They're going to come on over, and we are going to be screwed! But that's not the best bit about this. Because the wife you already had, the one living at home and looking after their son while he was working on this wonderful project, he actually met her while working on the first project we made to send out culturally neutral values to represent earth to aliens. His wife at the time, Linda, drew it with him. Working on disks to show - is that Sagan's kink? Is that a recognised fetish? Hmm, baby, talk culturally neutral to me. Can you say that in binary! Linda, his artist wife, she drew the picture on the right-hand side. You notice will are beard things about this picture. It was censored. It's not Linda's choice. We sent a drawing of ourselves naked but didn't want to show the lady parts because that will be too much. You will note that there is no hair on any of these bodies because aliens are upset by body hair. You know the greys, you see the grey aliens. They've not got any hair, not because that's how they exist, it's because they do a lot of watching. We didn't want to upset them. The other thing that we included is this kind of star-shaped thing on the left, which is a map of where earth is in relation to stars that give out pulses. A very literal name. This says basically, the frequent and how far away they are. This is a map that we thought in 1970 would be a really good way of directing people to come and visit. We've since discovered, this is a map of 13 ... we thought it's quite rare but there a billion of them in the galaxy. A lot have the same frequency, so we've actually just said come on over, we live kind of near here. And one of them we actually got the location wrong. So this is kind of equivalent to beak like, "I live on earth. Come find me. From my window, I can see three trees." One is 15-ish metres tall. So I think - for this, we blasted off into space, Linda blasted off - sorry, confused. Carl Sagan's first wife was also on the project which featured the brain waves of the woman he had just left her for, thinking about how happy she was to have hooked up with Carl. This woman, she must have been a champion because she sent it off month space. I think she probably enjoyed seeing that record being blasted off into space. I think it's a tribute to her she didn't blast it into the sun, frankly. We sent off something that got our address wrong, drew our genitals wrong, and featured us going, "Hey, man, we're up for it." I think aliens will come over here and be quite exasperated by the time they get here because they will have had to check a billion stars on the way, and they're going to get here, and there's a lot of signals being beamed around the planet, and helpfully, a lot feature naked ladies, so it will be easy for people to compare and contrast the diagram. They will see that, get here, and they will be like, "Funny species. They can't even figure out where they live or what their genitals look like."  I cannot be bothered. I'm going home." So, yes, don't bother with diamonds or the weird quicker of making space disks with your lovely, maybe seek solace and friendship. I've destroyed romance. I'm Scary! Next up is up. [Applause]. 
>> Scary Boots! [Applause]. Excellent. I'm going to introduce to you our next act straightaway. Is that all right? [Applause]. My name is Lydia Nicholas. I'm an anthropologist. I grew up in an area with lots of different cultures. I saw there were these different world views, you could come to some understanding and different kinds of solutions. From that soft stuff I got into Vikings at a young age. I moved from the easy things to myths, legends into the legal systems, and the way that they organise land and farming because I was a really entertaining 12-year-old! From that, that kind of taught me exactly how different kind of social and legal, and complicated structures within a society can lead to things like the Vikings having a lot of spare sons - they liked big families, and they - to head off a violent holidays. And since the past, as we know, is a great way drug to the future, that got me into science fiction, thinking about how new worlds could be constructed, how we could live together in different ways. That attempt wasn't weird enough, because it just resembled rich people a lot of the time, so I got into studying present cultures, or anthropology. It is the study of humans, human-pology. There are less people after they tell you that it's not the study of ants in the second lesson why would an anthropologist study technology? You don't fund the social sciences. You've got to do what you've got to do. I don't know if you guys noticed, but humans make technology. Humans build technology. Humans, if you're lucky, buy technology, and humans use technology. Often badly. Or weirdly, really. Like, for instance, you don't necessarily think about technology being all about people, but then, in the 1990s, we thought that hacking was putting sunglasses on while you were inside looking at green numbers scrolling through a screen and having fingers come out of your fingers, more fingers, and typing, "I'm in" whereas it turns out the best way to hack a bank account is to call up a bank and be really polite and that you forgot your password. The other thing that might seem that humans use technology weirdly. We created in incredible network of knowledge, of the internet, we created ways to share information all round the world through cables under the ocean and satellites soaring through the sky, and we use that mostly to send pictures of cats, celebrity cats, memes about cats, meow-tains, and the internet also loves puns. You can Google those. I did not write them. I'm "furry" sorry. I'm not! For a anthropologist of technology how people use - when we look at Cuneiform, we find little scratches in the clay. When we look at illuminate the manuscripts, beautiful things that people took months and years of their lives to create, there are often pau prints, and very annoyed notes from monks. Sometimes, cat pee stains and really annoyed notes from monks! We know that in their heart of hearts, the monks loved their cats because lots of little doodles in amongst the enormous letters of their Bibles of cats. Oddly enough, more of the cats licking their bumholes than we do these days. In this age of prudishness, apparently, we have missed out on that. So, you know, go the medievalists. So, for about how how people imagine or understand technology, how they connect, it's super useful for those of us trying to design things or work in a team to produce, but it's also useful when you try and understand the politics that creates the spaces in which we imagine and build futures. For instance, for a lot of people, maybe this is less relevant here, but for a lot of people, when I ask them when "futuristic" means to them, they imagine a shiny rocket in space. They imagine some kind of cylindrical shiny silver rocket heading off somewhere. I go to a lot of events about the future, I talk a lot about AI, and that means I see a lot of things that are supposedly about futuristic stuff which show me things that seem to be from the 1950s, right? So that shiny rocket in space, that was the future in the 18th century when people looked at trains going that way and went, "What is that!" It was the future in the 18th century with HG Wells with the War of the World worlds, the future in the 1950s in the space race, and, weirdly, still the future in the 1960s and 1970s after we had been to the moon, and we had had rockets do successful things! And part of the reason of that is that these stories we tell about the future, these technologies we describe and discuss and build are not necessarily about the technologies themselves, - about the technologies themselves, but seizing the space and imagining the world we want. A lot in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s was a lot about the Cold War, you have the games and magazines marketed often at small boys, because it was about the military, playing target practise. - practice. Girls were expected to think of princesses and traditional gender roles. They would have these shiny rockets, boys playing target practice. That's marketed to us as a future. To be honest, to me, that doesn't sound great, that sounds like a urinal. That is a urinal future, and I don't necessarily want that. I want a future that is weird, diverse, and strange, that comes from all sorts of different places. That's quite hard to achieve these days. It's a way out of the patterns that have been holding you. There is a William Gibson quote which you will all know: "The future is here, it's just not evenly distributed yet." Gibson, as many men have emailed me after I've spoken about him, have explained to me, he actually came at this with a sophisticated - and I know that - I just have a limited time. But yes, the future is here, it's not evenly distributed yet. What a lot of people take that to mean, used to say, I've got the futures, you might too. Your future state comes out of places like Silicon Valley, out of Silicon Roundabout - no, they don't. They come out of places and supposed to be rolled out in other places that are somehow behind them in time, even though linear time moves forward, even in, like, Dulwich, I'm told. So we hear that the future isn't distributed yet but the future isn't the preserve of a certain kind of hoody-wearing hacker. The kind of places, like, for instance if you think that the UK or the US is where the future happens, go to Singapore, the Wi-Fi works! Like it just works everywhere. It works better than it does here. It is amazing. Like, and even in countries that you think that have really struggled for complicated political reasons, like the Wi-Fi signal is better in most of Cambodia than it is in most of London. That's kind of because people jump forward in all sorts of different ways. One of the great examples I love is that the place where a lot of the Bitcoin transactions is not actually in hacker camps but in Zimbabwe. They ran out of physical currency quit a while ago, so they decided to have a Bitcoin ATM. It was the only place in the country that you could get money from a cashpoint. There are more Bitcoin transactions going on sometimes in Zimbabwe in a countryside market than there are in the big cities. Your average Bitcoin user is a bit less than a person with excitingly coloured hair and a stylish leather jacket at a hacker camp, and more it's like, it's an African mother trying to haggle over yams, and those people are literally living in the future. I see a lot of them. I end up, as I say, going to a lot of these futures events. Some of them, the smallness of people's imagination is kind of shown off. I was once standing at a stand in an event in Brussels, and trying to get a understanding, really, they were giving away in this match chose. I like food. - nachos. Someone same over to me and said you're sitting down and eating our food. Could you wear this VR headset and witness the future of insurance? I already had nachos in my mouth so I could not say no. The VR headset goes on. I sit down in a very fancy chair, because insurance salesman can afford fancy chairs. It makes them feel their life is worth something. I put that on. Like immediately, I'm transported to the magical world of an office .in fact, it is a meeting room. I said I like food. I can't eat wheat. In front of me on this table, it's giving me virtual biscuits. For me, I can't eat wheat, so most biscuits are virtual biscuits. Like, they're always just decoration. I'm happy for you guys. There were virtual biscuits, and a guy in a suit walks into this virtual meeting room and says, "I'm going to show you the future." Great. It immediately cuts, and I'm taken to a Vista of a man doing - to a vista of a man zooming between different screens explaining to someone how they can get their Tesla, who sent them lots of ... kind of insurance claim, and they're sending a taxi right now, and this took, like five minutes. It was really complicated to see. Like, why don't they just have an AI there, then you don't have to create this [inaudible]. And the guy literally, a guy in a virtual meeting room hands me a plate and says would you like a virtual biscuit? I can't take the biscuit. I have a headset on. Eventually, that cuts. I come back to the future session. I stumble away, hurt and exhausted, and hungry again, because biscuits. As I say, I can't eat wheat. They don't end up bothering to put [off mic] that I don't understand so you can put them together [off mic]. Write Python in donuts, and then I will be expressed! Then I go off to the future booth,  where I can get my regular supply of insects. At futures events, they always want to serve you insects. That's apparently the future of food. They've forgotten how food works. Like, serving someone chicken [off mic] animal and say eat, that's what they do when they're trying to] off mic]. I sit down, and a plate which is literally a pile of grasshoppers, and there isn't even salt. They say, well, you know, do you dare eat them? Yes, I do. I can't eat doughnuts, I'm going to eat the fricking insects! Most people don't dare. Insects are not an amazing [off mic]. Like people don't season food. That, along with a south of the others is the work of trying to imagine a better future ... make more donuts that I can eat. Don't trust anyone who tells you how ... on stage looking ... can't even be trusted to ... [Applause]. Thanks, Lydia. People, we've come to the end of augmented hilarity. Thank you all so much for coming. If you've enjoyed it, give us a hashtag on Twitter. We will say hi back. If you want us to come to your next tech fest or conference, get in touch with us on Twitter. That's it. Thank you for coming to Augmented Hilarity. Enjoy the rest of your festival! [Applause]. 