BRAAAAAAAINS - Archaeology and Philosophy of Zombies in Games by Dr Tyr Fothergill.
>> Okay, thank you. 
>> Welcome, fellow humans. Walkers, various infected, and those in transitional state, emergence machine intelligences and anyone I haven't mentioned. A quick note to start off. We are very good at talking! We will talk for quite some time. Please use the sli.do using code T176 and see us afterwards with any questions you might have if we don't get to your questions. It is time for introductions. 
>> Okay, Dr Tyr Fothergill is a research fellow on the human brain project creating infrastructure for neuroscience and IT. She works on data ethics, governance, and intersectionality on the side. 
>> Dr Catherine Flexibility is an applied - emergent technology, citing stuff like AI, increasing access and representing, - representation and - she organises things like EMF camp. 
>> Just a little bit. 
>> Just helps. Yes. Okay. In different ways, both of us look at issues of responsible research and innovation. This may not seem so important right now, but it will be. So what are we going to do today? Well, we're going to talk about what a zombie is, how they are depicted in video games, and a quick disclosure what we want be talking about mostly for the sake of time, and then introduce you to new zombie friends, including philosophical and archaeological zombies following through a quick jaunt through ethics, a quick stop at the zombie origins of biomedical ethics. We will strategise about how to prevent the zombie apocalypse. Zombies were made to make games marketable where they couldn't shoot humans. One of the last groups still politically correct to massacre. There's something pleasing about defending humanity from a horde of the undead. Apart from the specific feel-good function. What is a zombie. Why do they capture our imaginations? What unites all or at least all of zombie-kind, and are they actually scary? 
>> So all zombies occupy a special position at an ontological threshold, a state of being. In recent frameworks, they're both animate and dead, having a sort of personal power or agency without consciousness, control is misplaced or misaligned which is compelling for narratives and an interesting twist on what Tyr will say about the first zombie about Zemi. Zombies are undead. They are once like but now aren't quite that. There are a lot of grey areas and grey matter when it comes to zombies. If there were a formal scientific taxonomic classification and nomenclature for the undead, they would be unvaried, a state of beak. There are many zombies, and we often sees hordes, zombies that take a lot of damage, or wear a hat, or ride you off a building. What have you, and sometimes zombies or zombie-like heroes, a few which are revenant, are they still zombies? They occupy that threshold between life and death? I'm not really sure. They're excellent allegories for all things going wrong - bigly. Are they scary? Only in the many and infinite ways which humanity is. They're going to talk about the things we're not going to talk about ... which is very stick and also philosophical, so, a two-fer. One element in the room is George Romero, a total legend. His work and creations are incredibly important to the modern idea of what a zombie is. He's the father of the zombie movie, and his zombies have provided a vast and varied universe of zombies including many video-game zombies. Neither of us are Romero experts, and we don't want to do him injustice so we don't talk about his zombies today. The other extremely important thing that we will not be talking about is Haitian Voodoo religious practices. We are neither qualified to speak about this nor do we think it is appropriate nor reasonable to attempt to describe the influence of a religion which has historically been misinterpreted and misappropriated into zombie origins of it in a racist way. I think it's times for graphs. Who likes graphs? 
>> I don't get to work with quantitative data very much, so I miss my previous life. I look at zombie-related games listed on Steam. At the time, the total games in the sample was 19,55 on of these 49 are tagged zombie. There are interesting patterns that tell us about the core essence or platonic ideal about what it is to be a zombie video game. All steam games mentioned before, we did get an idea of the representation of games in a large scale, from least represented to over represented, you have casual games all the way to action games. Whilst there are casual zombie games they're far less represented than action zombie games. Are there ever zombie games about surviving? These are hugely overrepresented like certain politicians. Usually, games are about surviving zombies. So, there you go. If we look at what other tags co-occur with zombies, what ideas align with zombies in the form of tags? On the left side are negative values. We went one too far. Zombie, it's five times less likely to be a sport game. So one of you needs to write me a zombie sport game! Ice hockey, please! - hockey. Please. 
>> On the other hand, look at the apocalypse, everybody. Zombie game ten and a half games supposed to be post-apocalyptic than the average game. What the two graphs show they differ from the Steam game that an overrepresentation of games that involve action, gore, horror, survival, or multi-player games. It works well with other depictions of zombies in media. We are all in this together at the time of the apocalypse defending humanity in the words of that IGM Reviewer, plus, as a bonus, they give something you can shoot without consequence. Finally, in terms of getting to grips with the overall zombie picture, I looked at 148 zombie video games dating from 1982 to current prerelease. Of these, I could determine the types of zombies featured in these games and what 116 games, and what caused the zombies in 68 cases. These are not add up to 100 per cent like many things in life. Because some games feature multiple types of zombies, a classic shambling hoard, or cast by an evil ritual, and/or radiation or something like that. Thus we have Venn diagrams. Across 116 games, most of these, about 83 per cent, featured some kind of zombie hoard in the Romero vein. Many of which shamble at varying speeds. More than a quarter of games I looked at had special zombies with traits or abilities that delivered, and not just one type of zombie. 13 per cent of games I looked at featured a zombie hero or heroic of an young. Only in a few cases do we get something special like a revenant, someone seeking ... cider I've been told. There was but one zombie villain in Chuck's Revenge in Monkey Island 2. Dead villains and bosses are meant to be exceptional like a vampire Lord, and zombies are mostly unexceptional. They're everyone. A point that Catherine will speak on soon. So, of the 148 games I looked at in more detail, I was able to find out what caused the zombies in half of cases. Some games have multiple methods of zombification. More than two thirds of the time, it's a biological agent, a non-specific infection or outbreak been - most are caused by irresponsible science. This could be a biological agent, a radiation, a chemical spill, reckless expansion or colonisation. 23 per cent of zombies in this game were - necromancy, what have you been the we have the aliens who caused a mere six per cent of zombies in games that I looked at. They're slacking off big time. We reflect briefly on the biological agent, the medical category as a primary means of production. The rarity with which zombification is curable, it has medieval origin around unstoppable contagion by miasma which makes it an effective device. Left For Dead is a classic stand-out. It has everything one expects from the tagging analysis, apocalyptic, hordes of zombies. I tried playing it. I had a really good time, and I shot all my friends. Their agency is removed through death but they still respond to stimuli and have energy intake requirements and they eat brains. This is primarily to satisfy their physical needs. They often have laws of physics unto their own. Somehow where their body parts don't fall apart, and their flesh holds on to their bones enough for them to shamble at least. For the most part, they are you can recognisable hordes but sometimes they're loved ones that go through the changing process go often beg for death before they fully change over. So become a zombie through some sort of process makes this idea kind of personal and shows this "othering" process from loved ones to zombie. A philosophical zombie is a human without consciousness. It behaves like a human, has human-like experiences, so it can process experiences like sight and smell. It has memories and can process thoughts. However, it cannot consciously experience what it is like to spill coffee, process the smell, and identify it as being coffee. [Off mic] how can we know if other minds are conscious or not. Are you conscious, Tyr? 
>> In the EMF camp, maybe not! Yes, we can only know we are conscious because it is through our own experiences that we can know our own consciousness through our own experiences. Basically, it is used as a counterargument against philosophical positions such as physicalism which states that human nature can be explained through physical characteristics, i.e., neurobiologically, or the nature side of the nature-nurture debate. The idea of philosophical zombies said since they're physiologically identical to humans, even the logical possibility of them existing is an argument against physics. Dennet said they're logically inconsistent. Soma is the best example out there of a philosophical video game. It has a lot of zombies in the classic sense but asks a lot of tough questions about quite deep philosophical issues and leaves the player with uncomfortable scenarios that may well be possible in the future. A reanimated corpse with Simon's memory's experience, thoughts, et cetera, all on a chip. A direct copy of Simon's brain who died in a car accident. People like Simon has all of his experiences and memories, thinks like Simon, so basically, this makes it a human without consciousness, or a philosophical zombie. Our understanding of zombies as a narrative device has everything to do with what - device has everything to do with what they mean to us, means a rich and varied over time as a species. Let's explore archaeological evidence as how the dead were understood post-mortem. This is a lot about perceptions of life after blockage diagonal death how the power of personhood after identity, or a form of consciousness after death, and power and agency in specific corpses, or portions of corpses. There are anatomical cremations from Bronze Age Europe in Germany, means when someone died, their cremated ashes were put in a ceramic vessel. They were in order. Specialists could identify toe bones at the bottom, leg bones, and all the way up to the cranial bones at the very top. Why is that interesting? Well, according to a Bronze Age expert it reflects the specific understanding of the cremated remains as a whole person after death. So, whilst death is a transformation, bodily aspects of personhood are unaffected. This extension of personhood and personal power or agency outside of a corpse is evidence of practices of post-mortem punishes. The romance had the condemnation of memory, a fate worse than death. These were memories sanctions, erasing people from inscriptions, mosaics, removing anywhere names, and all evidence of their existence. This was used up to the late ninth century on Pope Stephen VI after a trial involving the previous Pope's 11-month old court. Look up the Cadaver Synod if you're interesting. When Severus, his sons were supposed to rule joint by. A brother was murdered in a horrible way. He enacted donatium memorei. An earlier Egyptian of the 18th dynasty, whose statues were defaced and her name removed from inscriptions because her memory alone was a threat to their legitimacy. Egyptian views on death were  what it consists of and how it works is an excellent example of how culturally specific these things are. The new area was - ... you have pyramids, and the god-king named Joko who exists on the boundary between life and dead and has un dead servitors, intended to invoke the classic mummy myth. The vast majority of this so-called awakened are actually just another type of zombie. It is interesting to note that these ark logically inspired zombies inspire the typical zombie tropes but turned ideas on their head. He arrived to find everything on fire with the apocalypse all around you thanks to the super natural hissy fits of the Jerk God who is, and there are a couple of typical zombie bingo squares right there. Points for current political relevance. The local people have been forced to flee to refugee camps. They're both preserving a sense of normalcy, so queuing for donated supplies, or being radicalised by follows of Balthazaar to be apocalyptic servitors to their will. 
>> Others worship the Jokop often, mindless undead servants of Joko. The pray argued fervently for their beloved family members to become awakened. 
>> So, I do hope this loads. From a responsible research and innovation perspective, what happens next is very interesting. One of your main story tasks involves rounding up some of these brand new zombies and using them to invade one of Balthazaar's strongholds, so using something conventionally morally wrong for good. It may or may not be the time to mention that arena.net have earned themselves a different mark in the judgment book but deploying zombies against the apocalypse? Super! We love it. What about the first zombie in where did these concepts and tropes come from? 
>> So glad you ask. ... a good idea for the idea that shaped the broad uber zombie of unlimited things along the continuum of - there are reasons why I don't use certain images in this talk. It's not my story but it's relevant and it is overlooked. History it written by the conquerors and the colonisers and looking in archaeology, this can't be forgotten. The zemi are many things at once, considered by some to be spirits, icons or idols with the latter most - colonial attitudes and ethical imperialism. What are they? Well, first, the linguistic angle. As researched by the anthropologist, the name "Semiebar" is a potential origin word for zombie, no less likely than the Congo words for "zumi or zambi". So quote thor have, the Tino language refers to not an artefact or object but an immaterial and luminous vital force under particular conditions, beings, things, and other things nature. Zemi is a condition of being, not a thing. It is a power, a driving of a vital force that compels action. It is a power to cause, to effect, and also denotes a condition or a state of being. So, again, state of being, as a central feature. I tell you about two examples classed as Zemi. In 1498 a Spanish Friar was dropped off on an island to make notes. He described observing a practise where a recently dead person was reanimated to answer questions about what - reanimated about what killed them. We don't know what was supposed to be accomplished through the writings. Another example referred to as a reliquary, is the cotton Zemi. This survived in a museum in Turin. Stolen, purchased, taken to Europe as curios, beautifully made, in this case, embroidered cotton figures formed around the bones of the dead. They occupy special potent state of being where they can be consulted by the living and take action. Both ... right. Both have power and agency which are not aligned in a conventionally expected manner. Whilst it is clear the nature of someone's personhood and agency changes after death and current debates when death is continues to evolve. Attitudes on the duration of death vary enormously across human belief systems, and tombs so the dead can be visited in an up close and personal way. There is a practise where every ITV to seven years, the dead are brought out, we wrapped, and danced with to live music. Personally, I think it is beautiful and touching but the tradition seems to be on its way out.
>> We mentioned the mention of zombies and their unexpected agency after death. The hands hands is a manifestation. - the hands of glory concept, the wondrous item from Dungeon and Dragons. According to the Dungeon Master's guide, the hand of glory is as follows. This human hand handing by a leather cord take up space as a magic necklace would. If a magic ring is placed on the ring of the hand, it wares it herself and does not count against her two-ring limit. The hand can wear only one ring at a time. Even without a ring, the hand itself allows the warier to use daylight and see visibility each once per day. Another ring slot. Day light and see invisibility? Not so great. Anyway, the real hand of glory is so much cooler. It actually there are actually hands of glory, because across northern and western Europe, they are super creepy, and steeped in folklore. Example here is from the last known hand to survive. Donated to the Whitby Museum in 1935 because that seems the most appropriate place for it to be -- there are many stories about the hands of glory but a few common elements. The hand is always a right hand, often taken from a newly dead criminal. Two, the hand is prepared in a special ritual manner described as mummified or preserved president the fatty tissue is lit. Sometimes the fingers of the hand, sometimes, human fat rendered to make a candle which the hands supports to produce a combination of super natural effects. These include inducing a deep slumber from all those around it and enhanced detection abilities so able to tell when people are awake, and so on, designed to assist with burglary, theft and murder. The flame of the fixers or the candle of the hand of glory can only be extinguished with blood or cow's milk. So back to the D and D hand of glory. It is a right hand, with its fingers disfigured. The effect of daylight makes sense because of the hand would shed light, and invisible could do those super natural effects as well. 
>> We would like, most of us, maybe not, but we would like to have a nice peaceful death, yeah? That's why we say RIP, sometimes sarcastically, and someone to one's meal, mobile phone, or career hopes. Notwithstanding the current use of the term, the fact that you have to wish it remains important, how one dies and the social and cultural context of death can have an impact on how your remains are perceived at risk of your corpse becoming reanimated. People fear death because identities and leg cities vulnerable to outside control and potential misuse. People used magic, protective coffins and other means to arrange protection for their future corpses, including protecting them from resurrection men, designed to conceal bodies or medical research. One example is shown on the left here. This is a post-medieval pot often used as a witch bottle used to prevent super natural harm. Buried with people but also beneath housing foundations, hearths and so on, not getting into immaterial practices, like prayer, spells, curses, and things. Invested in coffins for many reasons, secure or multi-shelled coffins protected your burial goods being robbed, your corpse for anatomisaion. 
>> Of course it is all about the adventure. Zombie games are as we saw adventure, action, survival against the worst odds. Sometimes not with a rifle, or a brick, or a sword. There's more to this, president as the archaeology demonstrates, their relationships with their afterlife are really, really complicated. There are issues to negotiate with your community, your family, and your friends. The last of us is another best-of zombie game not just of some review we read called it an injustice to call it a zombie game [off mic] but because it presents a compelling narrative, infection by a biological agent that seems unstoppable by medical science, bravery, love, loyalty, and ample demonstration that humans can totally be the worst. 
>> Speaking of humans both being pretty amazing and really crap, ana - post-mortem dissection of remains was one of the means by which surgeons and medical practitioners learned their art. It was important for innovation. Let's consider how happy people in the late medieval and post-medieval eras would be to have some  their corpses stolen if they were all into these pervasive ideas about post-mortem punishment, to say nothing about dignity and bodily protection. This was rooted in cultural ideas about how dead people should be treated and how long death actually takes. If you're from a culture that practises excarnation - 
>> We didn't all spend time on a body farm. That's where the body is left outside and gets nommed by various creatures. 
>> Thank you. The moral good of anatomical learning and medical innovation must in at least some ways outweigh social evil or how that advancement was accomplished vital to obtaining public trust - in  steps, medical ethics. People trust medical doctors now. There are a lot of conversations we have had about how the nature of experts trusted any more? Not really. For a long time, they were. The reason they were trusted is because systems of practise were set up respected ethics. Medical ethics is where the rubber meets the road, and the trajectory how that has shifted from the medieval programme onwards can tell us a lot about our video games onwards. Our zombie games are irresponsible science. They present that nightmarish contingent and the great pandemic from which science may not be able to save us. So what do we have in place for technology and neuroscience initiative? These projects at the bleeding edge much research to the potential to accomplish amazing crucially worrying things. In the EU - for now - we have responsible research and innovation which is what we use as the applied ethical framework in the Human Brain Project. The human brain project which Catherine mentioned now I'm a part of is a hugenormous scientific endeavour. It will run through until 2023. It is a neuroscience infrastructure projects with 12 sub projects and over 120 partners across the European Union and beyond. It is funded as a future and emerging technologies. 
>> What does that mean? 
>> It means we do all the things? No? Okay. We look at machine intelligence, robotics, brain simulation, neuromorphic computing, and so on, but dedicate a huge amount of resources to data platforms and policies to deal with data that comes out of the science-y bits, and other people's science-y bits in the future. At least that's the hope. We're trying to anticipate the direction we go in the future and to try to do this well. For one of the reasons be the 12 sub projects is called ethics and society. We have a DPO to ensure that everything is done ethically and legally, and data security is good, all of us in ethics and society spend time on focusing ways to improve research results through our own disciplinary perspectives. 
>> Also, it opens up new questions about what it is to be human and the essence of consciousness. For example, if we're philosophical zombies and not philosophical zombies in time, where does that leave potential AI development beyond narrow workhorse AI? AI a form of zombie perhaps? Intelligence that was functionally equivalent or better than than a human being, then we all have a great deal of thinking to do about zombies. We should start thinking about it sooner rather than later. 
>> They are super fun to shoot, and much harder to hit, and our team-mates being left for Ted. Depictions of zombies in video games show how vitally important it is that we innovate and do it well. In looking at ethical neuroscience innovation, we want to take the past into account, what went wrong and succeeded, and think about the future, and where we want to go as a global tech-aware, tech-driven socially conscious society. All humans on research project like this need to engage, have some conversations and research responsibly.  Thank you very much for sharing our adventure. You're welcome to ask us questions on the sli.do so we can answer them either here. 
>> No, no time! 
>> We can't answer them here. We have a podcast where we answer a lot of questions we got from this previous talk, and you're welcome to come and talk to us afterwards. We will go through your sli.do. Thank you so much for listening to us. I'm going to put my Herald HAT on now. Please don't volunteer - please volunteer for things. Please don't play music after 11, and please enjoy the rest of EMF camp. How long until the next one one. The closing ceremony is a highlight of EMF Camp in half an hour.  