Closing ceremony.
>> Hello! 
AUDIENCE:  Hello! 
>> Sorry about that. Somebody showed a Tesla coil on this stage on Friday, and it's fried half the video gear! [Laughter]. It's - we didn't know the Tesla coil was coming, either. I've got a beer. Hello! 
AUDIENCE:  Hello! 
>> Can we do that a few more times? This is a light painting done by one  of the youth workshops. 30 children doing it simultaneously. The M is weird. It's really good. Hello, again. Welcome to the beginning of the end sadly - aw! You're so easy! [Laughter]. 
>> I don't want to go home. 
>> We want to go home as well. The entire EMF team, a lot are sat on stage here. If there are any core members in the room, please come to the front and sit on the stage if you can. You know the tradition by now. We really hope you've enjoyed yourselves this year. It's been a hard event for us but it - event for us but it seems like everybody has had a good time. [Cheering and Applause]. Seeing you all enjoying yourselves makes it worthwhile for us. We got through all the pain. We would like to thank every single one of you who has contributed to the event, through talks, work shops, installations, building weird on site, helping wherever you can, volunteering. All those people. Thank you so much. We couldn't have done this without you. The event would be us here in a field and wouldn't really work. Thank you for what you've done. It means a lot to us that you've put the effort in. This photo was taken by a drone that I'm not entirely sure should have been there! [Laughter]. But this was taken on Saturday night, and you can see null sector in its full glory. Isn't it pretty? Really good. This is not a satellite photo! We don't have them yet. We will have them in a few days. We don't know if all the people that lied down on a giant wolf head will be visible from space. We will find out. So, some numbers about EMF, because we've got a lot of numbers. There were 2,500 people in this field this year which is an increase on last time. 2,500 people came to a thing that we did in a pub, and then you all turned up. It is brilliant! Really, it's brilliant! We checked and sent, can I say at least, 3,545 emails to organise this event. That's just the ones that are in our group account. It doesn't have my inbox, Will's inbox or half the other. It's more like 10,000 emails. If you do the maths on this, that meant we spent two months of our lives sending emails. It is not fun! We have 96 stage legs that we didn't use because we can't level the stages which is why I'm standing on an angle at the moment! We had 120 talks and 74 workshops plus all the ones that the villagers did. Thanks for the villages for laying on the stuff. That was amazing! [Cheering and Applause]. Our poor volunteers unloaded seven tons of chairs, which nobody likes doing, and, yes, and is we had 72 tons of waste water from the amazing toilets and showers which I hope everybody enjoyed this year. [Cheering and Applause]..  it took 40 minutes each day to sell out of T-shirts completely. We will be doing a second order of T-shirts, so there will be a form to sign up for it. I know not everyone got one. Sorry you all liked the T-shirts. We will get more. We had 6 kilowatts of smoke machines! Which has used 150 litres of smoke fluid so far! [Laughter].  And over 400 kilograms of propane gas mostly for cooking - mostly for flame throwers and mostly for cooking. I believe we have to get rid of a lot of it this evening as well. They might just be on. We have nor flamethrowers,s it's the fine! We have drunk 576 gallons of beer so far! [Applause]. Someone gave me that number. Steve. Gallons. It is out of date. How much is it now? It's over 600 gallons now. Keep drinking the beer! We have raised £1,200 for the Red Cross in their charity stall down there! [Cheering and Applause]..   it is double what we laced raised last time and not double the people, so you're all more generous. The Red Cross thanks you. My laptop has turned off again. I'm a professional! Okay, we have had 18 satellite imaging passes. We have no idea if any of them worked yet. We will find out soon. And we have over 100 was the of lasers on - 100 Watts of lasers on site. We can't find the key to turn them on, so there's no more lasers! Now, this was going to be a time lapse, but given I can't see that screen, I'm not going to make it play because it will take me five minutes and everybody saw as at the opening ceremony, it will be a disaster  disaster. Imagine this is a time lapse. You can watch it on Twitter. Again, with the Tesla coils frying the equipment. I don't think that's going to work. I don't think it's going to work if I do this. [Shouts of encouragement and laughter from the audience.] I can't see -. [Shouts of encouragement from the audience]. [Cheering]. That was the worst game of Nightmare ever! [Laughter]. I told you ... yay! Build up.  All right, I didn't really prepare anything for this. Everyone went silent, though. And then, eventually, the tent company show up! [Laughter].  Not even yet. Here we go. Anyone counting the days yet? Here we go ... . [Laughter].  Imagine being us sat in Portacabins when this was happening! Yay! [Laughter].  
>> The last second of that ... [inaudible]. 
>> There we go [Cheering and Applause]. 
>> Right, so some of you will be at the badge talk and you know what happened with the badges. We had a lot of production problems this year due to time scales. I know not everyone got them. I know everyone was annoyed about that. Yes, under-12s get badges. We will do another production run of the rest of the boards we have lying around with a few more components and make sure that everyone who still wants a badge can get one. Try not to be angry with us. It's hard to make mobile phones! We will be in touch about in later on. Also, Ian Softly has autographed a lot of broken badges. If anyone wants a broken badge instead of a working one, we can probably sort you out. I take that back, sorry. But there's some very rare badges around. You can swap them, or something. The captioner flag ran again this year. We had 43 teams take place, including one person who has played remotely from somewhere on their own. I don't know who it is. We had 401 correct submissions to the CTF, 507 wrong submissions. It is not a great statistic but well done. Apparently, I was 19th in the scavenger hunt again, and I didn't realise why people kept taking selfies. However, I'm pleased to announce the scoreboard which I think is finalised. So, the first placed team is Never Try. Are they here? [Cheering and Applause]. Well done. The Belay team came second. Oh.  Well done. And, the third placed team was Grace Hopper's Posse. [Applause]. They carefully went on name - win on name alone. The CTF team will be in touch about prizes. I'm not sure what they are this year. Sorry about that. Team: we could not have done this without the organisation team. There are a lot of people now. All of the people who are sat on the stage are a fraction of the team. Some are out now revving around on golf carts having fun. All of these here, can you stand up for a second. Put your hand in the air, then. Sit there, whatever! [Laughter].  They've been working for two years to make this event happen. People think we have a year off. We don't. We start working again when this finishes. It takes a long time to get these parts in place. However, if we do come back to this site, it will be easier next time. Everyone here is an unpaid volunteer. We do this for the fun of it to make it happen for us and you, and all of us buy our own tickets. We don't get anything out of this apart from a lot of work. Please, when you see these people around site, thank them for what they've done. Shake them by the hand, buy them a drink if you can, and tell them the event was great. They need to hear it. They're sad at the moment. 
>> I'm not sad.
>> Russ is not sad! [Cheering]. [Whistling].  [Applause].
>> Thank you. It's much appreciated. I think that's the record for applause at the end of this. So very much appreciated by all of us. Also, Russ and I would like to thank the entire team on a personal level because they've made what we were doing as a mad side project into what it is now 2,500 people. You make it possible. I'm going to make you ... [off mic]. [Cheering and Applause]. We have to thank all the volunteers. Now, the volunteering has been hard this year. We haven't had as many as we spend, because of the new site, we weren't ready for it, and we're sorry it didn't work as well as it expected. We hope you enjoyed the amazing volunteer food. Can everyone in the audience who volunteered, spoke, or otherwise did something at the event, please put your arm in the air. [Cheering and Applause]. [Applause] Thank you so much for what you did. It meant a lot, and also we would like to thank the volunteer catering team, who turn up, cook amazing food for reckon and never leave the tent the entire weekend. They are wonderful people. [Cheering and Applause]. Finally, we have to thank the sponsors who made a lot of what we did here possible with the badge, the childcare, many of the artworks be saw everywhere, half of Null Sector which was incredible. They helped us pay for this to make it all work. A lot of are in the audience right now. All of the sponsors have been fantastic to work with. They've been really supported, some dropped in at the last minute. I would like to make some special thanks to Lucid who dropped in at the last minute to sponsor childcare when we had no-one doing. Texas Instruments and HCD for heroic work making the badge happen. Texas Instruments flew people over just to work on the badge with us to get the firmware finished in time. They are amazing. [Cheering and Applause]. [Applause]. I would like to thank HCD for a very stressful week because they - HCD because they worked hard to get the badges assembled in time. We have to thank Lime Microsystems for not telling us we were completely crazy when we asked for a GSM network in the field. They went, "That's fine, we will build that." And then they built it for us. They're lovely, lovely people. Thank you so much. So, we want to talk about the future of EMF. We've been doing this for a while now. It is obviously what the team here with can only go for so long. Until the last one. It is not the last one! We want the event to carry on for a long time. I want to be able to to come to this event as an attendee. We're planning for this to be a slow handover of team members where we can, and we want all of you to be involved if possible. In the next year, we're going to be reforming the EMF organisation so it's easier for people to get involved so there is less points of strategy failure on individual people and restructure ourselves in the long run. As part of this, Russ and I have decided that next year is the last event that Russ and I will be directing. We will still be involved in the organisation but we need to start handing over now, because if a bus hits us, it's quite bad right now. We need people to get involved and help the organisation and help make this. It if that is you, we would love to speak to you. I know it is a daunting task, but it is absolutely worth it, and both of us will say that. Keep an eye out on your email. We will be recruiting after this event when we've recovered, so probably January! But we are going to stay involved. I don't think we can ever really walk away from this. So, as part of that, we are taking a leaf out of Burning Man's book, and we are starting events to get the community together between EMFs. Social things, small things, but all over the country we want to see groups of you getting together regularly between EMFs to keep the community going. A year is a long time, and we think it is important that people are building projects, collaborating with each other and keeping the EMF community what it is. We hope this would be the best way for you to get involved in the organisation as well. If you're interested in getting involved in this, going to those meetings would be great. Organising those around the one. The first one will be in London. Hopefully, we will start another, take a while to get started because we are exhausted. We want to take it, and we hope you get them. Because we like puns, we are calling it Electromagnetic Pulse because it is a regular meeting! [Cheering and Applause]. We really need to gather feedback on what went well with in event and what didn't. So far, everyone just keeps praising us, and while that's lovely, knee know that things didn't work out. We have an anonymous feedback form online. We would love you to submit your opinions, personal opinions, but do tell us nice things because it is horrible when you read an endless feed of bad. Like tell us the things that made you really happy, the stuff that you want to see us do again, the stuff you would like to see expanded but the stuff we need to fix - tents being a big one, being angled, but that one is quite hard. It is likely we will be coming back to this site. We really like it here. We can't say for certain yet. A quick request going out from some people. If anyone is going to Trondheim in Norway, there is a missing person a friend of the organisation. They've been missing since the 20th.  There is - there are parties out searching for them at the moment. They were lost when they went hiking. If thin is going there, please do get in touch. There is a Facebook page up there which will give you all the information. We have one more downer which is quite sad, and like to dedicate this EMF in memory of Dave Harvey who was a speaker at EMF several times. A constant supporter. His whole family came to EMF every year. They loved it. He was due to speak again this year. Three weeks before the event, he passed away very suddenly. We would like to dedicate this to his memory. [Applause].  The entire team to like to express our condolences to his family.  
So, 2020 is the next one. Hopefully, we will be coming back here. We may keep it the same size. We may not get - we think it might be worth doing what now we know what we can do. We will be back. The team will be here hopefully with some of you involved. We are quite excited about it. The talks are over now, the workshops are finished. The installations are still running as long as they haven't been taken down. Still got plenty of power, so the music is running, the flame throwers are definitely running, 200kg of propane to burn! [Applause].  Enjoy the rest of your night here, and please drink all the beer in the bar! 
>> [Inaudible]. 
>> How much beer do we have left? He says plenty, so try you best. 
>> Every beer you buy helps with the deficit from the fact that we've got tents that we had to pay for that we weren't supposed to pay for, so please drink all the beer. 
>> [Inaudible]. 
>> Please don't go to the First Aid Post. Go if you're injured. If you're injured can, definitely go but try not to get injured. Thank you for coming. See you again in two years. If you see the organisation Italy around site, or you see someone wearing a high-vis who is volunteering, or behind the bar, say thank you to them stop say thank you to them, shake their hand. Thank you for coming. See you again in two years! [Cheering and Applause]. Also special thanks to Will who is the sort of unofficial third director of EMF but will be - he will be becoming official. 
>> Tradition requires me to stand here with a pint glass! 
>> Thank you so much, everyone. Please go to the bar. [Applause]. 