How to dispose of a body - a dead interesting talk by Sophie Lovejoy.
>> Welcome to this celebration of a ... wrong script, hang on! Hello, I would love to say that I'm delighted to see so many people in the audience for this talk, but actually, am I the only one that finds it terrifying that this many people want to know how to dispose of a body? All the methods I'm going to talk about today are either legal or in the process of being approved. I was very tempted to pretend that this was a practical session, I think  and, with the help of my teenage son to do so. So, a few days ago - he's just there! A few days ago, I found myself Googling body bags that would fit my son, and decided that was wrong on so many levels we weren't going to take that approach. Just in case there's anybody squeamish in the audience or children, I'm not going showing graphic pictures or talking about anything too revoting. I am going to be talking about burying, dissolving, burning, and freezing bodies. One thing I've not chosen talk about today is plastination created by Gunther von Hagens. I'm not going to do it today is because it is horrible and I will not show you pictures of that. If you're interested in that process, go and have a look. Before we start, I really want to share that this talk almost didn't happen. A week ago, I nearly pulled out because my eldest is poorly. After three, could you all really loudly read what is on this slide? One, two, three ... . 
AUDIENCE:  [Inaudible].
>> Thank you. I know she's watching it on the live stream. I had a humanist baby-naming ceremony for Tess in 2001, and, as a result, I got trained by Margaret Nelson of Suffolk Humanists to join the ceremony s' team. I conducted my first funeral, and conducted a couple of hundred since then. I don't do it full-time, part-time with some other jobs. It's an amazingly rewarding job to have, and it's the easiest bit of lecturing you will ever do, not only is everybody in the audience grateful, nobody ever asks you questions at the end! So this session will be a whistle-stop tour of body donation, burials, cremations, what to to with ashes, and more recently developments. Definitely not going to be comprehensive but hopefully I will give you a flavour of what is out there and give you some ideas, and given how creative people that attend EMF are, I'm excited about hearing from you in the bar later on any alternative methods you might have come up with - hopefully legal ones! Okay, so I'm going to start with donating your body to medical science, because if ever there was an audience to talk to about it, it's probably this one. It's something that is massively appreciated by the staff and students of the medical schools. If it is something that you choose to do, your body can be used for three purposes:  it can be used for anatomical examination where students and health care professionals are taught the structure and function of the human body; or it can be used to research the human body and how it works; or you could possibly be used for surgical training. The Human Tissue Authority who produce this guide are responsible for licensing and inspecting the institutions involved, and they're regulated by the Anatomy Act of 1984, and the Human Tissue Scotland act of 2006. I'm not sure what is too different about Scottish bodies! That sets out - those Acts set out the legal framework for the removal, retention, and the lawful use of body parts and bodies after death. The key thing with donating your body, if you absolutely must, give your written consent before you die. I don't know if you will be relieved to hear or not, nobody in your family can donate you to medical science after you've gone if they don't have that consent. You get the form from your local medical school, fill it in, and then you keep it with your will, so it's available when it is needed. But not everybody's body is accepted, so it's important to have a plan B. For example, most medical schools won't donate body schools after Christmas. You won't get accepted if you've recently had surgery, or if you've donated organs. You might not be accepted if you have unusual anatomy, or if the donation is more than six days after you've died. If you have had a communicable illness before death, or a variety of neurological disorders, you're also excluded from donating, not just for the brain disorders because it might be something that is infectious if the cause isn't known but also because rational consent has to be sought. They won't accept donations from people who have had those. Most medical schools will come and pick you up unless they are outside their area in which case they might ask your estate to pay the removal costs of your body. Nevertheless, donating your body to medical science is probably still the cheapest option. Usually, at the end of the process, they will meet the costs of cremation, although some of them do offer burial. If you want what is left of you to be buried, and it's not something the medical school offer, they will return what is left of you to your family to be buried. So that might be quite nice if you don't get on with your family! [Laughter]. There is often a memorial service afterwards that is attended by the staff and the students who have learned from the donor, which is very respectful as it should be, and sometimes, the families are able to attend those. So, the guidance for each individual medical school varies, so, if you have a look' HTA website, if that is something you're interested in, they have a finder, so you can find your local medical school. Okay, so moving on to burial, you're not going to donate your body to medical science. Nowadays, you're almost certainly going to be buried or cremated, so might change in the future as we will hear later on. Usually, a funeral director will collect the body, prepare it, restore it and delivery it to the cemetery or crematorium where you're being buried or burnt, and make sure the necessary legal forms are completed. It is harder to cremate a body because you can't exhume a cremated body afterwards if there is a problem. Only about a quarter of burials in the, only a quarter of funerals in the UK are burials. That is a churchyard or a public ceremony but there are lots of these natural woodland burial sites. This is on the north Essex coast, and this is where I'm expecting to end up hopefully. Tip cally, in the woodland, in the natural burial grounds, you can pick a tree instead of a head stone. The Sunlife Cost of Dying report from 2017 said a typical burial costs around £4,750 at the moment. There aren't any legal requirements to use a coffin for a funeral, so you can use a shroud or something else if you prefer. There is no requirement to have somebody lead the funeral, so your family could stand up and speak, and you don't have to have a minister or a humanist celebrant or anyone else in charge -- celebrant. If you would like to transport the body yourself, there are funeral directors which offer a storage-only service. The Natural Death Handbook had plans for how to build your own coffin. You can use it as a bookcase in the meantime! [Laughter].  My ex-husband, when we were married, refused to build me a coffin, but I bet if I asked him now, he would be absolutely delighted! As well as coffins made out of card booed and wood, and willow, somebody in America is now offering something they call the infinity suit which is a suit, a shroud suit, and the threads of the suit are impregnated with mushroom spores, so, after death, the mushrooms with consume your body and its toxins so it eats you, and it leaves behind clean and pollutant-free compost afterwards. I'm not going to talk any more about traditional burials. There are two types of burials I would like to focus on. The first is burial at sea, and then how to bury somebody in your back garden. So burial at sea, as you can imagine, there are special requirements for the materials and the designs used in the coffin. So, for example, if you want to be buried at sea, the coffin has to have between 40 and 52  two-inch holes in it and around 200kg of iron, steel, or concrete clamped to the base of the coffin. This is to prevent the body being returned to the shore by tidal can you remember rents or picked up by fishing nets. You've got to make sure that the body isn't embalmed, and that's because of pollution. You've got to make sure it's lightly dressed in biodegradeable material, and I can only imagine if it gets out and somebody - I don't know. Finally, there's got, the body has to have a tightly attached durable identification tag that says not only the name of the decreased but also who the funeral director was, presumably to prosecute them afterwards for not doing it properly. So anybody can be buried at sea. You don't have to have been in the navy or anything like that but you need a licence you get from the Maritime Management Organisation via the gov.uk website. Licences cost £50 if you would like to have a sea burial off the Needles at the Isle of Wight, between Newhaven and Hastings or Tynemouth in North Tyne side. Anywhere else in the UK, you can get a licence for £175 but you have to provide exact co-ordinates and demonstrate evidence that the body's not going to get washed up or picked up by shipping boats. It is worth taking into account, however, that it takes about five hours to get the boat out far enough to conduct the ceremony, and the water tends to be quite choppy, so, again, if you don't like your family, and they're prone to sea sickness, I strongly recommend sea burial as an option! You might think it's easier to scatter ashes on the sea instead but if you're doing it off HMS Belfast on the Thames, which was my father's final commission, and so we went to scatter him from there, you can only do it when the tide is going out - which is quite straightforward, but you have to be careful because you run the risk of at the exact moment your brother is and ating down to and at er the ashes in the water, a tourist goes past with their noses pressed up against the window. It might not be as dig nationwide as you would perhaps have hoped for. Burr ying people in your back garden: I know it sounds unlikely, but have you heard of Kirsty Alsop off Lowe occasion, Lowe occasion, Lowe occasion. They honoured her mother's wish to be buried in the back garden. She's the most high-profile person who has buried someone in the back garden. It is legal to bury somebody on private land in the United Kingdom as long as you have permission of the land owner. Now, I don't know how that works with mortgages, so you might need to explore that. Every burial's got to be recorded in a burial register stating the full name of the deceased be age, the place of burial, and the name of the minister, celebrant or the registrar who recorded the death. This register can be as simple as a single piece of paper, kept in a safe place so it's not lost and nobody accidentally digs up. There's got to be a plan showing the exact co-ordinates, and the recommendation is that the plan and the register are stored with the deeds of the house. I can't imagine what the estate agent would do with that at some point in the future. Lovely house, and people are asking why it's so cheap because there's a body in the garden. If you like the sound of this, why not possibly - I can't possibly recommend the garden burial website long enough. The guidance says you should consult the local council about not messing up the local water table, and, actually, it recommends that you should consult them, and that website offers fantastic guidance on just crack on with it because, if the government don't agree, they've got to get a licence to exhume the body, and it's unlikely that they will do it. I offer you that website as something you may be interested in if you have hopefully a large back garden and you would like to keep somebody at home after they've died. So, moving on to cremation, then. Cremation's by far the most popular way of disposing the body in the United Kingdom. There are about 300 crematoria around the country. Now, crematoria are usually near a main road. They are open Monday to Friday during normal working hours and most of them have a fantastic combination of free parking, a clean toilet, a  water, and a tea and coffee machine. Now, the tea and coffee might not win any prizes, but if you're travelling with children, it's a brilliant place to stop instead of running the gauntlet at the local service station! [Laughter].  And my son can testify to this. Ration process: once the ceremony is over at the crematorium, the curtains closed, once the congregation has left, the coffin passes either from the catafalque which it rests on, the body is hidden behind the curtains or sometimes they drop down out of sight. I'm not aware of any crematoria in the United Kingdom where the doors open into the fires of hell. I think that's a film thing, and I'm fairly confident in saying that is not something that you see. The coffin is withdrawn into a room behind called the committal room where they change the name plate on the coffin, and they fill out a card, and that card then stays with the body and then the re mains until they're collected from the crematorium. The coffin's put into the cremator. The cremator is a cubicle by allows for the insertion of one standard-sized coffin, that said, there are now more and more being replaced around the country with bigger ovens, basically, because we are getting bigger as a nation. Years ago, it used to be someone who was very obese could only be buried. Now they can fit them in. Cremation takes around one to three hours between 870 and 980 degrees Celsius, and always done on the same day, or almost always done on the same day. The coffin is never opened, nothing is added or taken away once it's taken out of site because the funeral directors have already taken out the breast jail plants, the pacemakers, and checked that you've not hidden a mobile phone in there because mobile phones in cremators are not very good. Once the process is over in the cremator, the technician rakes out the re mains, but what comes out of the cremator isn't ash. What comes out is bone fragments, coffin ashes, and things like artificial hip joints. This is all taken to a second room where, after the metal's been removed, the remains are placed the "cremulator". You always have to say it in a scary voice. The catch me afterward basically pulverises the remains into ash. The old ones were pretty much a tumble drier with a few granite balls inside them. I'm so sorry for those of you already. Basically, tumble drier, big balls of granite inside it. The re mains fall through a grille at the bottom, and then you have ashes. The more person ones involve rotating blades or flails, chains, and the one in my local crematorium has been replaced with a rotating chain. My other half found this out when I took him to the animal open day where you can go behind the scenes which I thought was a really, really good date but ... . I'm not convinced he did. You can ask him in the bar later. Back to the ashes. Studies have shown that an average male produces about 3.5 kilograms of ashes, and an average woman produces about 2.5. The care you pick them up this is - the contain er you pick them up this is a similar sized to an old sweetie jar and will release ashes to a family member or the funeral director you used. If you don't go for a traditional scattering, and be aware, there is quite a lot of ash, there are lots of options to choose from. Recently, the news has reported there are at least two occasions I know of where somebody's ashes have been scattered into the mosh pit at a gig of a their favourite band. There was a young lad who died at the age of 17, a well-known free-runner, and his mother had his ashes divided up into 100 bags and sent them off with family and friends to be scattered all round the world so he could travel after his death at the age of 17. But you can do so much more than just scatter ashes. So this is my friend Helen and her husband Steve. They've given me permission to share their story. In 2009, Steve died, and, after his - after organ donation where three people benefited, I was asked to conduct Steve's funeral, and we cremated him. Helen then had some of his ashes put into shotgun cartridges because Steve was actually an instructor at Clacton Shooting Club, and so she proceeded to hold a shooting party with Steve in the ammunition. I believe she's watching at the moment, so thank you for that! Also one of the first people in the country to have somebody's ashes turned into diamond. They extract carbon from 100 grams of ashes, they add other stuff and put it into a high-pressure, high-pressure machine under the pressure of 6,000 atmospheres and a temperature of 2,000 degrees Celsius, a diamond is created, so a half karat white diamond is around £4,000, and a similar half-karat diamond is around £2,300 and it takes between two to four months, depending on the colour that you would like. Die Mondays are really expensive, but there are loads and loads of companies now making all sorts of jewellery that you can incorporate your loved ones' ashes in. Whether that is a human or your pet. As you can see, there are beads up there for charm bracelets, cufflinks, pendants - all sorts of things. You can have glass art made to put on your wall, or, on the far right there, you can have them made into a paperweight. If you really want to permanently wear them, you can have ashes put into a tattoo. So the earliest tattoos were ash from a fire rubbed into a predefined wounds. Memorial tattoos are the one step on. They pick the finest ashes from the remains, mix them with ink, and you're good to go. For music lovers, there's a UK company called And Vinylly. They offer you the chance to live on from beyond the groove! By having your ashes incorporated into a vinyl disk. The basic package is £2,000 getting you 30 records with custom art work and any sounds you choose lasting a maximum of 24 minutes. They're high-end options include global distribution to record stores. If you're a serious muso, you might want to check that one out. Much more short-lived but a hell of a lot louder is having yourself put into fireworks. Before I start about putting ashes into fireworks, can I please emphasise that you should never, ever attempt to dismantle a firework to put ashes or anything else in it because it is highly dangerous, and it's potentially illegal, and, obviously, there isn't a single person in this room who would consider trying that! I'm not responsible for whatever response. -- happens. In 2005, Hunter S Thompson made the news having his ashes fired out of a canon in the fireworks display. You can have ashes in one large rocket. As it explodes, you have a spectacular scattering of ashes. That's about £70 to £100. Or you can have them put in a large consumer firework which I gather is called a cake. Hopefully, that is the only way ashes will get into a cake. Tip al costs for that are between £200 or £300. That's one of the large ones that you light and it goes bang, bang, bang, bang, so ashes will be fired with each of those. Finally, you can also - you can go the whole hog and pay upwards of £2,000 to have a professional firework display so spread more evenly over your chosen site. I've remembered an ex-boyfriend of mine from university who swore he wants his ashes in an ashtray in the student union bar. You can't do that any more. That's a real shame. Sorry, Paul! Okay, so, if at a few hundred feet isn't high enough for you, there's a company called Ascension Flights that appeared on Dragons Den to launch their space funeral business in the UK. You can be scattered from a high altitude balloon for just under £1,500, or this can happen. [Captioner sound cut]. Here we go. [Video].   They will produce a memorial video like that, launch you up into space and scatter the ashes from space. They've got tracking equipment where they can get the equipment back afterwards. You can choose your own launch location for more money. To take, to the next level, there's one firm in America going much, much further, and they will put a portion of your ashes or DNA on the moon, or they will just send it out into outer space for you. You're looking at £12,000 worth by that point. Space doesn't particularly float my boat. On this subject of floating boat, did you see what I did there! Somebody was going to ask me about Viking funerals. By that, I mean having your body launched on a burning long boat, to my knowledge isn't legal in the UK at this time. Now, I'm talking about a boat that is torched before it leaves. I found an answer that it takes a dozen Archers about half an hour shooting flames arrows at a ship to get the desired toasty effect. I  the audience gets bored and the ship looks like a porcupine. This is a floating urn. 80 centimetres long, you can put your ashes - you clearly can't, you know what I mean. The ashes of your loved one can be put inside it. You can set light to it and then send it out on a calm sea or a lake, and it takes around half an hour but obviously duration depends on the conditions. It says on the website there are pegs to control the speed. Didn't have time to look into how that works. The last way of scattering ashes I would like to talk about is the creation of an artificial coral reef. There is one off Weymouth called Solace Reef, and generated from pyramids of local Portland stone. Each stone has a name plate on it, and there you go out to sea, and they are pushed off, and they sink to the bottom of the sea. They've got a hole in them you put a biodegradeable urn containing somebody's ashes. The really interesting thing about the reef is the reason they chose pyramids for this particular site was this the thing most conducive to productive the lobster stocks in the area. The mind boggles! Just before I move away from newer ways of disposing of the body, it's worth just mentioning open funeral pyres. There was a guy called David bringing Elsworth who walked free in 2005 after he burned his mother in the back garden. She died of natural causes in 2002, and he kept her at home for eight weeks before disposing of her body and then proceeded to claim benefits for another two years afterwards. That's why it went to court. The judge said the case was extraordinary because, "Burning her body, the public did not commit a criminal offence. Because you did not burn it or dispose of it with the intention of obstructing or preventing a Coroner's inquest." Please don't take that as an endorsement or permission - just don't do it. Apparently, the neighbours complained about the smell of the bonfire. That's as gory as it's going to get people, it's all fine. So the use of open pyres to satisfy religious requirements is still under debate. In 2010, the Court of Appeal ruled that according to a strict set of criteria, it was legal. The council in the north of England who is now being challenged to put aside a facility where open pyres can actually happen, or at least grant the planning permission for somebody to build such a facility. There isn't one in the UK yet, to my knowledge. Nevertheless, the campaigner who has been working towards this, a guy called Davinda Guy conducted an open-air pyre in 2006, and he wasn't prosecuted as it wasn't in the public interest. Then, please don't doing these things, or, if you do, don't blame it on me. So, moving on then to newer ways of disposing of bodies. The most recent development is something adopted in parts of America and Canada, and recently in Australia, something called alkaline high droll cities, and it goes by a variety of names, including water cremation, or biocremation. It's similar to the process used to get rid of dead cows off the BSE outbreak. I would like to apologise here to anybody who is offended by the use of a photograph from the Daily Mail, but it is a really good photograph. I'm sorry about that! Basically, the body's taken out of the coffin, and it's loaded into the chamber. Stage is involves weighing the buoyed in order to calculate how much potassium hydroxide, or lye needs to be added. The liquid that comes off looks like tea. It doesn't contain any human DNA, if it makes a fantastic fertiliser for the garden, although I don't think they've designed the machine with a way of harvesting it off. However much your loved one enjoyed gardening can you imagine turning up to the cremation with a bowser on the back of the car? Just no! What is left after this process is pure white bone, and then of course the medical bits need to be removed like the hip joints, and then it's back off to the cremulator. Severn water has held up a process for one because it won't grant a trade effluence license. It is a real pity as this only uses ten per cent of the energy of a standard cremation, and there's no air pollution, so I suspect this is something that will be happening in the United Kingdom very, very soon. Finally, I won't risk the video, I want to talk about something called promession which is freeze-drying a body. This process was developed in between. There are five steps. You take the body out of the coffin, and it gets placed into a chamber, and then frozen in liquid night general to crystallise the body which is put on to a plate where you're vibrated for a minute, and you turn to dust. Then they have to freeze-dry it. What is left is put into a small biodegradeable "coffin" but it's small. And because it's made out of corn starch or potato starch which can be buried quite shallowly, and, within a year, it is turned into soil, basically. It's really sad, although the company has been going for 20 years, and there are a couple of other companies trying to push a similar thing, I can't find general where promession has actually taken off yet. That said, again, if this appeals to you, I suspect by the time it's your time - sorry to flag that up - it might be available much more widely. So, those are the ways in the UK that I'm aware of that you can currently legally dispose of a body, but as somebody who has been conducting funerals for 14 years, I would like to gently offer a caveat: when you decide what you would like done with your body, record it in your will by all means. Make it clear what you would like but don't make the arrangements too complex or too detailed, or unachievable because it leads to a huge amount of stress for the family afterwards. Just be clear about what you want and let your family organise the details. You've been the largest audience I've ever spoken to that didn't involve explosives! I would prefer to take questions in the bar. Life is really short, and I urge you to take every opportunity that you possibly can, which is how I found myself on stage A at the EMF Camp talking about dead bodies. I will see you in the bar. Thank you. [Applause].