Life after Robot Wars by Robert Karpinski captions test. 
>> Before we get going. I have a couple of messages here. First of all, if you go over to Null Space at 10.20, they're preparing to have the photo for the satellite flyover. I don't know how well that will work given the cloud cover. Hopefully the infrared spectrum cameras will get something. They are prepping at 10.20. If you fancy today, that would be really helpful because we are short on volunteers. I've got a note here. It's written in all caps, so you know it's important. We really need stage volunteers for AV. If you volunteer for three hours or more, you will also get a meal. And hopefully getting under way in just a sec..
>> Our first talk this morning, for Life After Robot Wars. 
>> Sorry, this is life after Robot Wars. It's a rant about getting a big heavyweight ready for the show and what fun we had. My name is Robert. I'm an electronics engineer based in Cambridge. The robot has got a Twitter that it occasionally rants on - less occasionally! We've got a Facebook page we try and post updates where we are with stuff on. 
I ask questions. We're pretty reactive on it. If you've got questions, ask. At the beginning, I watched Robot Wars when it started, so the very first series with Jeremy Clarkson - which is a bit weird - and these terrible robots trying to kill each other hopefully but normally just breaking down. It took a bit of time before I got round to actually participating. I kind of started building  robots around 2014, so, this is a job and I could fully fund this terrible, terrible hobby that eats all your money! One thing can be said that everyone at robot events is lovely. They will help you fix your robot right after trying to kill it, they will suggest things to fix for the next time. It's a great community. It's full of really lovely people, some of whom might be here today. I'm really pleased that I got into it. So, as a result of getting into it a lot and making some good friends that are moderately local to me, we eventually thought to ourselves, it would be fun if we made a heavyweight because we competed in the smaller classes, 13 kilos to - we thought it would be fun to high 100 kilos. How hard could it be! The Reboot hadn't been re-announced at this point. So you have live events that happen around the country. We thought we're going to do live events. So, but we were concerned that Robot Wars would come back so we heard inklings of it. We said, you need something unique. You can't build a cheese wedge flipper which was the predominant style in the UK at that moment. We can't make a spinner, because they're too dangerous. Spinning a bit of metal around is too dangerous, bits of metal flying off at a couple of of hundred miles an hour. That's not fun. We didn't want to make a spinner or a flipper, so the one we came up was a control robot, and, after a lot of random sessions where we each egged each other on to worse ideas, we kind of came up with this. There were other ones. They were different. So, we went with control, because it's pretty rare in this country. Most combat robots in this country are flippers. So we thought control robots would be interesting because moderately unique, so that's what we started designing. And this is a midway CAD. It is not the very original CAD that we started with, and it's not the CAD we ended up with. But it's somewhere in the middle. You can start to see some of the shape of it. We've got folded side pods. None of us were too keen on welding at that point and thought we will fold everything, it will be easy - huh! And then, we've got the claws on the top, and the idea being that they would come down and clamp you, and a centre body would lift you up. We had a weird idea wouldn't it be fun if the centre body could do a full 360? That took a bit of engineering to try and do that, so that was a bit of a painful choice. We decided to call it Deadlock because the software engineer in our group of three was more forceful with naming things. We tried a couple of names. He was like Deadlock. I was like, I guess. It's Deadlock now. It stuck. So a Deadlock is a software term where you've got distributed processes, and they all end up waiting for someone else to finish but that someone else doesn't ever finish, so it's a deadlock. We thought it's quite nice because we're going to try knock around someone and make them dead - the robot, not the person! We clamp with the top jaws. Now, everyone is made out of these tough steels, like something called Hardox, and a couple of tons isn't enough to get through it. We need lots of tons. We don't need to get through it but just to hold them to get away. The centre body lifts them off the ground and we can do fun things with them. The goal there is to make it very fast. We had a lot of fun getting the gear in for that right. By that, I mean we got it wrong a lot! And we got it right. Then we broke everything else. So, yes. So, we did manage to sort the jarring out. The way we did this was we got all the motors in that grey body in the centre. And then, the drive shafts come out really funnily into the red drive pods.  Woo-ooh! So CAD is one thing - computer-aided design is one thing. You've got this screen, this model, everything fits in, the bolts, motors will fit in, the batteries will fit in. It is all on a screen. You can't physically touch it. You can't touch it, you can't it will go together as you imagine. The stereotypical one is a bolt you can't put in because there's a bulk head in the way. We thought it would be a good idea to make use of the local hack space and laser-cut the robot out of cardboard. So that way we've got an actual physical model that we can see, touch, minute, and a - manipulate, and a glue begun is about the same size of a welding to know. Any way you can get the  glue Gunn in, you can make it. We made it shorter by a few centre metres because we felt it was excessively long. Yes, it is big for a robot. Other robots, right?  So at this point, it was - season 2 had been announced and we were looking for people to enter, and we tried entering but we hadn't quite finished some of the finer points of the CAD so it probably wasn't a good idea we got accepted. Bullet-dodge. The second time round for series 3 we entered, and we got accepted. You get accepted and told by the way, you need to be in Glasgow in six weeks. It's like, "Okay, we can do this!" We ordered the metal - which was not cheap - and a week later, it all turned up. And it all looked kind of - it kind of looked-ish right but as we started to try to put it together, as I said, it was all folded, so it should have dropped in place, maybe neatening up some of the holes, should have bolted together nicely? No, not even slightly. The supplier we used had cut everything wrong, and had bent everything long wrong up. They missed some of the key important holes for bolts which is annoying because it's tough. We don't want the opponent to drill through it which means it is hard for us to drill through it. That was very painful. The other big problem we had was every single bit that had a bend in it, the bend was wrong. Every single bend was wrong. Some things were bent backwards, some things had bent in the wrong place. Nearly everything was bent to a completely different angle to the angle we needed. None of it fit together. So the only way we could get it to fit together was literally to cut it, grind it all a bit, and then weld it back together again. This wasn't fun, and it was very difficult. So, we managed to kind of get it somewhere there after a lot of pain and a lot of evenings of hard work, long days, long evenings, so, as you can see, yes, that's metal robot. It looks similar to the cardboard one. The hope was that we would buy it, get the metal done, that would take a week to come back, and then it would take us maybe a week, a week and a half to get it all together and welded up, and we would have the remaining two and a bit weeks to realise we had made a mistake and fix it to get the drive working so it could drive around, get lift and clamp working, so we had all these great kind of plans that immediately flew out the window the second the metal came back wrong. We did eventually getting it look like the robot in the CADs. We did get bits turning, the motors would turn, the wheels would turn for a while, and the lift would lift up a bit, the clamp would clamp a bit. So we drew close to the deadline when we had to be this Glasgow. We chucked it on a pallet in the middle of my friend's lawns. We sprayed is it grey. Stuck it on the back of a big lorry. The pallet got tied down. We filled it with everything we thought we could need - basically a garage-worth of tools while the primer dried in the back of the van, and drove up to Glasgow. We got there on the Wednesday, which is when you're meant to get there. We had a couple of days before our schedule to try it on Friday. We spent literally every waking second we could working on it or thinking about what we needed to do the next day. So they opened up the big warehouse where the Robot Wars really was at 8 am, and we were there. Quick lunches, and ate the free muffins. The food was good, actually. Worth it! And then they kicked us out at 8 pm and that's when we left. We were down with heads in robot trying to get it to work and get the drive to work for more than about five seconds, get the lift to actually move as fast as it should have been moving. And we were down as one of the first - not, well, we were town to be in the first fight of one the later episodes, hence going down on Friday. We were constantly, "We think we might be able to make it." Every time we fixed one problem, another problem would crop up. Some were masked by the previous problems, sometimes something we didn't think was a big issue and turned out to be a bigger issue. Finally, we had to go to the production, team,  "Sorry guys, doesn't look like we can fix this before Friday." We got put back into reserves and replaced by a robot called Kyote. A lovely bunch of guys and girls, great robot but they were ready and we weren't. They took our prays. We kept trying work in the reserve section. But, unfortunately, that was - still couldn't fix it in time. Production staff throughout the whole thing were very lovely. They were understanding and supportive. Our point of contact was like it's an awesome robot, completely different to everyone else. It does a thing that no-one else can do. We're keen to see you guys come back to series 4 if and when that gets announced. We were, "We can do that." We were like, "Big setback but we can move on." That is a picture of Deadlock as we were leaving the arena, and you can see the pits, the big grey primer. So we left sad, tired, but kind of a little hopeful for the future because we figured back we would come back for series four where Robot Wars was doing good, and we would be fine. Our stuff would look really cool, and Carbide would kill us later on! We all had fun by that point. Then the BBC don't renew it. That was pretty heart breaking. There are still live events. I think the next one we are scheduled for is Stevenage in mid - there's that to look forward to. We've still been working on it, trying to fix up the drive which has proven difficult, trying to fix up a lift. We're quite keen. We think we've got the lift sorted now the complex chain path is all constrained, and we can lift about a ton in about a few seconds. Round up all the play up. We've done a few live events with it. It kind of works but the drive has finished a bit sloppy. We've kind of that, like. Totally fixed. Haven't heard that one before! We will see. We will see. We will try to get it run at Stevenage, get a good fight. Hopefully not get the stuffing kicked out of us. Once that is done, we will see it painted and see if we can go, to, say America. While the BBC has cancelled BBC Series 4, the Americans have got Battle Bots on series three, and hopefully we will get on their series 4. Also, China's got a couple of TV Robot Wars shows starting up as well, so might be taking it to that. Yes. Questions? I will be outside, or just try and flag down the white Sinclair zipping by at 100 miles an hour! [Applause]. Timing for a couple of questions. If you put your hands up, I will throw this microphone over to you. 
>> My name's Lucy Rogers.  I'm really pleased to see that there is life after Robot Wars for the Roboteers, and there's plenty of things you can be doing and potential. Any advice for an ex-judge? [Laughter]. 
>> I guess the first one would be was Hebocon yesterday that could have dealt with a firm judging hand. I'm not sure of the status on that one. There are other live events going on around the country, robot combat-related. I'm sure there are plenty of opportunities with someone as distinguished a CV as a Robot Wars judge. Of course, yes, I forget. So one of the joys of being in Cambridge is there's a rather rabid Raspberry Pi community, and two mad selfless gentlemen called Tim and Mike run a competition called Pi Wars every year, and Lucy is one of the judges for this, and basically, you build a robot with a Raspberry Pi at the base, and you have to complete a number of tasks. I can't quite remember the tasks set for this year are, but when did the deadline for entries close? Next year, then! It'll be awesome. There is one over on this side, from one of my team-mates, who is going to mock me mercilessly now! 
FLOOR:  Hi. Can you tell us about the motor controllers! [Laughter].  Specifically, are you ever going to finish it! [Laughter]. 
>> So, when we started designing the robot, one of the things we noted was, in order to get everything packed into a small space make it compact, we would use the big brushless motors which are more efficient than the standard DC motors you might be more familiar with. Because we are using brushless motors, you need big speed controllers for them. You either buy these £, uh, ones which are £700, which is a lot of money, or you can try and get away with buying the £100 ones. There's a reason why there's a price difference. The £100 ones are not very good! I foolishly volunteered to make better ones because I'm an electronics engineer and I know what I'm doing(!). How hard can it be? I'm starting to hate that phrase. I still say it by accident, though.  I'm still working on big speed controllers. Thanks, guys. Still haven't committed to a deadline, though! 
>> Are there any videos here or online? I'm really anxious? 
>> We should have some videos on our Facebook page. That's probably the easiest way of me trying to hunt through my collection of poorly organised videos. We tweet videos as well but the Facebook page is the main kind of thing we try and keep updated. The other one is the live events. Sometimes, they will put out videos of fights, so, you will see a grey robot briefly fight and then break down in an arena with poor light. We will get better. 
FLOOR:  Hi, Rob. 
>> Hi, Rory. 
FLOOR:  Who lessons were learned from this particular build, Rob? [Laughter]. 
>> Ouch! I guess the big one what it is a big investment of the money you spend on Robot Wars. I'm not going to tell you how much that one cost. It's hard to justify buying all the bits for a robot before you got on the TV show, but at the same time six weeks to build an overly complicated - well, very, very complicated first-of-a-kind robot was probably a bit much, maybe? So, yes, definitely. You start with a smaller weight class and work your way up. But, yeah ... . 
FLOOR:  What is your opinion on precision-folded Hardox in constructing a robot? [Inaudible]. 
>> Let's hear it again for our speaker, Rob!  Just to let everyone know, we are still looking for volunteers. The call for AV volunteers is still written in all caps, so I think that's quite important, and you can also now leave feedback on the EFM website if you've got any suggestions, complaints, if you want to tell the organisers how much you loved it, and you can do it anonymously if you wish. 