Richard Feynman - Dick by Scary Boots.
>> This is towards the end of EMF camp. We have an amazing talk for you today from one of my favourite people in this department, Scare which Boots, and will be talking about Richard Feynman. 
>> I want to reassure you I have seven years at higher education and I can't handle split screens! This talk is as you may get the impression about Richard Feynman, Dick by name, Dick by nature. Why am I doing this talk? Who here has heard of Richard Feynman? A lot of hands going up. If they're not going up, I thank you for your trust. Who has heard of Werner Heisenberg. Same amount of hands. You're ruining my folks. Who has heard of Paul Durac? Thank you, everybody. Anyway, the point that I was trying make and not the right point to make in this crowd is that Feynman is surprisingly well known to other theoretical physicists. He practises clever, egotistical, and put a lot of work into shaping his p - on the down side, a lot of those stories have someone else as the butt or don't support other people to go on and be successful, so I would like to send that up, and for people, like the two people in the room who don't know who he is, like to give a bereave review of the good things that he did, and for everyone else, introduce you to - want to consider. If anyone wants to call me out on references of this, they will pop up later. This all online. This is ... I appear to have written my notes ... so he was a Nobel physicist. There are a lot of those. We make one a year. Why do people talk about him in particular? A lot of his reputation comes from stories told about his life, involving ... and breaking security ... from picking up women all of which are not often associated with physicists. You will also notice ... on the,  ... don't seem to ... there we go. Gets you described as a character.  As you will know if you've ever shared a house with someone ... . That is the most excellent laugh. Thank you. So, Feynman's biggest achievement, there are few of they will. He did a lot of significant ... . And get tension, and other people take away the ... only got time to go through one achievement, he also ... as the name might suggest. It was a problem when you tried to combine ... with the behaviour of electromagnetic fields. That is when you're trying to look at and how things are moving. When you try and combine those things, that was a problem in the 1930s, 1940s, and up ... published. These diagrams are called Feynman diagrams. The general contribution Feynman made it here was to make it clear and easy for other ... time thinking things through, to make the it easy to work with rather than being idiosyncratic. Really key points for him was take this based on what he was, rather than accepting what -- take this based on ways that made sense to him rather than just accepting how other people ... got a laser. This one shows a tying ram where you have a photon, a wiggly line that goes up here, and an electron that goes straight up here. It's fine, if you calculate how likely it's to do that, the numbers come out a bit wrong. There's another possibility, right. If you're only look at where they start and finish, you could be doing whatever in the middle. So it would be that the electron comes up here, it absorbs the photon, a bit of light, so it gets a bit of energy, moves on a bit and then re-emits the photon, and what you see at the end it the same, or it could be goes up here, emits a photon. You fined, as you add these more complicated diagrams, you get closer and closer to what we see in reality. This was kind of - these dying raps are a way of laying out the possibilities that you need to take into account to make your numbers work out right. There's an infinite number of these diagrams because you can keep adding in complicated stuff. You can have this kind of madness here where you've got an electron going up, it emits a photon, those photons, come together, create two electrons, one of which is an anti-particle and another which is a regular particle, then they self-annihilate and create another one. There's all this stuff going on. His insight was to make a set of tools so it was easy to categorise what reactions you needed to look at to make an easily-used set of maths tools so you have a certain maths equation that correspond to this line, certain equation corresponding to this vortex, and you put them together, and this tells you how to make little corrections to the baseline theory until it comes up with the numbers that are closer and closer to reality. As these diagrams get more complicated, thankfully, they get less and less significant. So they make less and less of a difference to the outcome. So that's kind of nice, because you can say I want the answer to this precision, so I will stop calculating as soon as the diagrams get this complicated. And this is really interesting, because apart from anything else, here you've got two - like, at the edge with the loop, you've got two particles coming out of the vacuole. Two cart pels where there were not particles before, they annihilate, and just light. We've got particles just appearing. It's kind of mad that one is travelling backwards in time. Apparently, the maths of a negative charge travelling backwards in time is the same as the maths as a positive charge going forwards in time. We've got that point where part and anti-particles can be equated to each other if you switch the direction of tile, which is something  physicists are happy to do. He built a set of tools that help us understand what is going on under the conditions of relativity and quantum physics, which is difficult. He managed to do this through his desire not to conform to work out things for himself. That's admirable. Less admirable with the other conclusion he reached from here. He decided he should not wash his hands after urinating because that was superstition, what everybody else did, and why would he be like other people. He also didn't believe in brushing his teeth because he thought it was "big dentistry". I paraphrase that is what he meant. That makes the rest of this weird. He was constantly trying to pick up women. Constantly harassing women, and trying to hit on his colleagues' wives, go and stay with his colleagues and pester their families, hit on his students' wives. Apparently, he did this while never washing his hands or brushing his teeth which is quite astounding. He used to go to bars, buy women's drinks, and then get mad that, while they let them buy him drinks, they didn't sleep with him. I can't quote this whole story here because it is not succinctly described but called a woman worse than a who are for re - a whore refusing to sleep with him after buying her a sandwich. It gives a brain melt if you think about it too much. Two interesting things here, one, Professor Feynman thinks that every woman is a sex worker, and the other one is that he thinks the going rate for sex is a can of Coke and a Subway! Imagine he approached other professions the same way. Let me buy that tuna roll for you. It will be okay. Why are you buying things? I'm an incredibly rich professor, and I find you attractive. Well, that's altruistic, but whatever! And now I have bought you that sandwich, you're going to come home and unblock my toilet? "I don't know." You know the rules when you accepted the sandwich, you agreed to be that person's plumber for a night. Come home and unblock my tubes right now. "What! What!" I think we can all agree that he had a weird attitude towards exchanging money for goods and services.  I've lost my cursor. So, people say often say he was of his time, as if that was an explanation of his behaviour, but everyone's of their time. Genghis Khan was of his time. It's what you do in your time that matters matters this is Feynman's dirty laundry, this is something he decided to boast about and write in a book to show how clever he was. This was published in the 1980s. I do acknowledge things change, and I'm a researcher. I'm not the best in the world but I'm pretty diligent, so I called my mum, and I asked her in the 1980s was it socially acceptable to assume if you bought a woman a drink she would sleep with you. She confirms no. So according to my mother, this officially not the acceptable detail. Not acceptable thing to do. When you tell this as a fun Feynman story or refer to the books he wrote this in as fun and suitable books for people who want books on physics to read, what are you suggesting? What if you're suggesting to get women to sleep with you is an achievement, if women are mechanical, and you need to buy them the right things, put the right things in the right hole and wiggle them around, and then you'll be entitled to their bodies. What message do you give to the women around you? What does it say about how you think about women, and how you think successful people, successful physicists, think about women? That's a homework question for everybody. You can send me your answers on Twitter. I'm going to race through this bit. That was the heaviest bit. We're through it. Heaviest in terms of wrath at righteous wrath. A speech he gave to a teachers' conversation in 1966. If you want to make a straight line, you go over a certain number to the right for each row you go up. That is if you go over each time, the amount you go up, that's a deep principal of geometry. I was amazed I didn't realise the female mind was capable of understanding geometry. I did learn a lesson: the female mind is capable of understanding analytical geometry. When people are invited to give conference key sheets, they try to give an inspiring talk. I kind of like would like to point out that he gave this talk nine years after his sister had got a PhD in physics. One that involved her using vectors. And, so, probably understanding geometry. Secondly, he gave this talk after he had worked with" Cheng Shen Wu, so reported to be able to do all sorts of things, but I'm querying how well he could actually do those things, because he's report today write Chinese. He could write four Chinese characters when I looked into it. That's not able to write the entirety of Chinese. He did some work with this lady, and she did a really, really complicated experiment where she figured out if the universe is the same if you reflect it in a mirror. So, if you spin the nuclei of atoms, do they give more particles in one way or the other and would the universe be the same if we flipped its direction? He thought she was doing this work with when he shoes doing their knitting. She was - talking to the male theorists, we would like to you do this. After a day of going back and forth, the entire room was covered in more scraps much wool than an underground sheep-fighting ring. Apparently, he thought that the whole discussion between this woman and her theoretical colleagues looked like the soft play area at CERN.  Really women require yarn-based explanations of lines and shapes. Does it have to be knitting? If we do it with felt? Maybe we can put a dye or pattern on the paper that represents the concept in some symbol ic representation, or maybe women have the same minds as blokes and understand geometry. Occam's razor, right? What was he thinking standing up in a conference of teachers saying women doing geometry was impossible. This woman did that experiment and found out that the universe would not be the same if you reflected it in a mirror. Her male colleagues, the theorists got the Nobel Prize. She got nothing. Excellent scientist.  Feynman is credited as an artist.. he worked on learning to draw with a friend because he knew he could use it to get women naked. I owe credit to our colleague for pointing out this quote in the book of memoirs the one published in the 1980s that I checked with my mum. "I did a drawing of a beautiful blonde from the art class, and I tried to draw the shadows as they were. But the torso as well so you can see her breasts and the shadow I made. I called it Madame Curie nobody thinks of her as a woman, beautiful hair, bare breasts and all that. They only think of the radium part." Curie, who liked to be known as her Polish name, I know it's hard to pronounce for those of us who don't have the Polish heritage. Picture Marie Curie waiting for you to introduce her, the trumpets come out, they do a bouncy dance like this together. It's Marie Squad of Scar Curie. You won't forget it! It may sound like Feynman was himself obsessed with breasts and he wanted to think of breasts every time he thought of female scientists. She did most of her work as seek ing validation for her bosom as these excerpts show. "Dear diary, I picked up the Nobel Prize for chemistry. Wore the Wonderbra. When will someone talk about my incredible shiny natural medals, by which of course I mean my breasts? My husband insists I be given credit for our joint work but I really wanted lingerie. When will people real that the work I do into the transmutation of nuclei is a cry for attention to my assets. What do I need to do to get people to look at my tremendous bazoombas. I thought soldiers will appreciate the female form but they appreciated their war wounds being diagnosed. Someone noticed my amazing Cleavage. I guess I will go away and invent radiotherapy. I guess that's the sort of thing that will draw attention to my tits. It was a good idea to store this diary next to my experiments. It is saving a ton in candles!" Trying to be fair here, I read a number of books as research for this, and they do say the few colleagues Feynman had, discouraged participating in physics at this stage. Other factors can be discussed. He said the female college felt accepted by him on an individual level and his sister does state that he was supportive. I do wonder how many people would have come forward to say they had the problem with the greatest genus of the age. I think it's interesting that of in this book only two pages addressed how his values and actions could be seen as sexist. I think there's definitely more to be said on that point. I would say he's a great scientist and I enjoy look at his lectures. I'm not sure that full of feminist hate. I love physics. I like lock-picking and breaking security. If one is going to go beyond the pure science and talk about the person, you need to accept that the stories about women are troubling and repeating them uncritically perpetuates the ideas that he's working been. You're implying that the behaviour that went along with it was okay. Think about how it would feel to be a woman in this situation or think about someone who was stunned who could understand geometry, he was thinking about your breasts. If you talk about what he's like as a person, you have to include contributions from all his stories, even the complicated ones and admit he really was a dick. I'm not taking questions because I need to have a drink! [Applause].  
>> Thank you! The inimitable Scary. Thank you so much for that fantastic presentation. Just a couple of announcements. We still really want help with catering on at the bar. It's a good way to learn new skills and meet some people, and help with the winding up EMF camp. As people are leaving, it means we have a smaller pool of volunteers. Also, I have to remind you please, people after 11 pm, not to play any amplified music, because otherwise we could lose our licence which would be really bad, and just please don't do it, because I don't want to have to come around and be a party-pooper. Have nice quiet parties. Acoustics. We will have a changeover, and I will then be talking up here with my lovely friends here. If you would like to talk to Scary, you will find her at the bar. 