The use and abuse of CT scanners by David Mills.
>> We're in need of more volunteers. There is not to be any amplified music. 
>> Not sure how I follow [off mic]. A little bit of work we've been doing to recover lost film and lost cultural heritage. The first question that comes up generally do people know the difference between the a CT scanner and an MRI machine? They're both big things you lay down in, they both make a noise, CT bombards you with ionising radiation, and MRI makes your photons vibrate. I build and abuse CT scanners. I want to build a small desktop MRI but I haven't got round to it yet! This is a Mel C T, used for horses. I couldn't get permission. It is difficult to get ethics approval to show you a patient going in a CT but no-one seems to care too much about horses. So, the big dough nut shape is a rotating X-ray source with a detector opposite it. The sort of CT scanners I use are more research systems, so desktop lab systems where the scanning volume is not a horse's head but approximately a Pringles can. If it fits in my Pringles can, it can go in my CT scanner. A Pringles can would take about a week to Stan. It's not a fast scanner but goes for ultimate contrast. You can see things that you wouldn't see in commercial systems. This was built specifically for dental research. All the stuff I'm showing the abuses of the CT scanners, no patients were stopped from betting their surgery or treatment due to what I've been doing. This is all research machinery. I said we use ionising radiation. Where am I operating? Up in the X-ray region of the spectrum, through the visible spectrum, through the ultraviolet into X-ray s, generally around about 90kV X-ray energy which is not actually a scale shown on that. But closer to the UV end of the X-ray spectrum. Hard enough to go through bone. Taking a step back from CT, what do you do if you just invented X-ray s? Like these people, you've connected a high-voltage X-ray source to the back tube in the vacuum to a vacuum source, a vacuum bulb which is some of the things that are on the back shelf in the picture. And the guy is actually looking at his hand through a phosphorescent screen. If you're the guy that actually invented X-ray s, you say, Goethe, darling, please put your hand in this dangerous-looking apparatus for me while I go out the room. You get the first X-ray image, the first medical X-ray image showing bones and the gold wedding ring. She is recorded as saying I've seen my death because she's seen how she's going to end up as a skeleton. She didn't died from hand cancer, or anything. She lived to a ripe old age for the 1860s. But X-ray s are boring. You know, if you have had an X-ray, you generally had an X-ray because you've done something like this, a compound fracture of the arm. You're having a bad day if you're having an X-ray. I don't do X-ray s. I do CT scans. If you're having a Mel C T scan, CT scans are terrifying because you're having a CT scan if you have had a really bad day. You've gone through a car windscreen at speed, or diagnosed with a tumour in this particular case, this is a simulated image. So you really only have CT when there is something seriously wrong. But I don't do Mel C T. No patients were harmed in the messing around I've been doing. What do I do? An actual day job, the use of CT scanners. I scan lots of teeth. I scan a lot of extracted human teeth that will be used for research projects, or, when the boss comes in and says my seven-year-old daughter has lost one of her teeth, she wants to see what it looks like inside. You wonder why seven-years-old have teeth like this, and that many fillings, and I'm not going to comment! I also scan lots of bones. This was an extracted femoral head from one of our technicians. She had to have her hip replaced. She was getting elderly and had hip pain. We see the protrusions on the surface, scraping the inside of her hip joint and causing pain. So this is a hemo femoral head in the scanner. We are able to, these protrusions are false coloured but harder than the  bone. There's more mineral density. You wouldn't see this in a commercial CT or a medical. Other bones I sometimes scan are in much worse shape. This is third and fourth lower vertebrae, that have actually collapsed in this poor guy and fused. It didn't have a happy ending for him because I've got a lower section of his spine in the lab. Got it after it was donated to medical research. This is an acorn that's got parasitic wasps inside it. These were used from the early antiquity to the middle ages. You grind them up, mix them with iron sulphate and you can make a nice dark black ink which is a permanent ink. The history of the world is written in this. You can see in this. This is rendered CT data. Volumetric-rendered CT data. You can see there are chambers in there, and the wasps are growing in it before they are hatched out. We did discover something with this:  the literature we were reading says there's only ever one wasp per acorn. In this, we count six. Yes, the literature is wrong. No-one's got round to correcting it! So this led on to if we can actually see the oak apple scan, or the scan occurred after this particular piece of work, because someone said, if you can see low-levels of contrast in bone or teeth, can you actually see the iron in iron ink on paper or parchment? It turns out we can. We did initial test scans. We can see and read rolled-up documents. Then the Norfolk Record Office got in contact with us. They said we've got this 14th century parchment roll. It's the manor of Bressingham, the yearly accounts. This is as far as it will unroll. Parchment is processed animal skin. When it gets wet and compressed, it basically turns into a raw hide dog chew. Key scanned this. It took about five days to scan. What we are able to do is produce a full virtual unrolling of this. If you look on YouTube, such search for the Apocolypto project so get Mel Gibson out on that. You will find an uploaded section that the BBC did on the work we did there, and there  if there are links to other information. What we are able to show that the stop section is invisible, like the lower section is just from the X-ray data, and we are able to see ink where it's faded optically. It is pretty good. We published this. Then we got contacted by these peel. These people have a really cool project. They've got this chest of 2,600 delivered 17th century copy 600 haven't been opened. This is ongoing. If you're in the Netherlands, in the Hague, go to the Postal Museum on the Museum of Communication. You can see the chest and the work we're doing with this. What they wanted to do was read - well, what the historians that are interested in this project, they want to know what the unopened letters say. They can read the ones that are open but what about the ones not opened? We got involved. They have these wonderful sax seals. They don't want to open the ones that are not yet opened, for many reasons that they go into on the website. Effectively, you can't study a locked 17th century letter if you've opened it. It's no longer a locked letter. They have these wonderful seals, and they form their own security. It would be a really good EMF Camp workshop for someone to do the letter-locking next time! So scan them up. This is a Swiss-roll selection. This is a slice through ruffle halfway. You can see these are pretty complicated. There are many layers. There are lots of bright spots. Bright spots in this are actually crushed sea shell has been used to absorb some of the ink on the page. The ink shows up as much fainter bright spots. If you remember those lovely 17th century wax seals, they're full of lead. You don't get many X-ray s through the lead and the reconstruction algorithm we use can't cope until you get the white areas and streaking and failure. Working with a couple of really bright students at MIT at the moment to try to do the unfolding of these, and do digital origami to unfold the letters and make them readable. We're hoping to publish this year. After we've done all of this, people were keen to see what else we  could do. We got sent this photo. It looked like cine film. It came along with an email that said it's triacetate film that degrades and excretes s  ascetic acid. When the acetic acid is form, it degrades faster and forms more of the acetic acid which helps it degrade faster. The emulsion that is pasted on, the part of the film that contains the image then becomes cracked, distorted, it slides off the acetate base. It's no longer usable. Then the layers of film, as this progresses further, the layers of film actually get stuck together, so that, if you try to unroll it, the way it was described to us if you take a sheet of glass, draw a stick figure in Marmite, put another sheet of glass on the top, it would be recognisable. As soon as you peel those apart, the image just smears. What usually happens in archives is as soon as there's the first hint of vinegar about a film, it immediately gets through a capture system to get what they can from it, recordings made, the original goes in the bin. They don't want this because, if there is ascetic acid fumes in the archive, it can infect other film, and it can cause real problems. Usually, there's more than one copy of a particular film. So we did a proof-of-concept. We kept putting the guy off because one, this is bigger than a Pringles can. This won't fit in my scanner. We also don't think it was going to work. But the guy from the BBC, Charles Norton, kept on, and he sent us this. For the younger people in the audience that don't recognise what this is, it's a prototype micro-SD card of its day [Laughter]. Thank you. This is actually a 16-millimetre positive-negative - sorry positive print, of some film, it fits in a 35-film can which fits in my scanner nicely. We put it in the scanner, left it for a weekend, and expected to come back on Monday just to nothing. We reconstructed the image, and just paging through some simple software, you can see actually, we got pretty good separation of the layers of the film in the Swiss roll slice. If you cut it at any particular angle through, oh, there are pictures in this, we might have to do this. We were expecting to come back to an empty data set where nothing's really visible. It turns out we do have the contrast sensitivity to see silver positive silver on acetate stock. So, this caused a bit of a problem. We didn't expect to have to do this. We didn't expect it would work. So, we ended up spending - the plan was to spend maybe an afternoon. In will be a quick hack. We will see if we can get anything out of this. At the end of a quick afternoon, it was this does actually work. We will spend another day on it. So the guy I worked with, Graham Davies, an absolute genus, he spent most of the time on this. He did the film while I was working on the soundtrack. He spent a week on it. Like, "I need another afternoon. I can just tweak this." We ended up with this. We came in on the Monday, sounds are not playing. Ah! [Applause] The soundtrack in cine film was recorded as an amplitude modulation wavy line. Along the side.  Let's try this. I've heard this so many times, but I like this.  "This is the Gaumont British News, presenting the world to the world." So, it's a bit crackly, but the sample rate is limited by the resolution. We scanned that. It is a real physical lilt. We scanned this at about a 13-micron resolution which plays back the audio bandwidth to 7 kilohertz. So, after we did this, and received this, we sent this to Charles. He was please have a go with our film. He told me a bit more about what it was. It is this. It is Morecambe and Wise, series 1, episode 2, found in a shed in Nigeria. It is print from Telecine. The film can was on the bottom of the crack. It means the film inside has been exposed to the elements for 50 or 60 years. And it's in a pretty degraded state. What used to happen is the BBC took a load of stuff on video tape, but wanted to use the video tape, so there are a lot of missing Doctor Who, a lot of early TV shows. The stuff that survived was the stuff go that the telecined and sent out to South Africa and Australia on the understanding they would burn after showing, but this one survived. It's too big to fit in my scanner. It does not fit. It does fit in a laser cutter! [Laughter].  It turned out, if you really want to Stan this at the resolution we think we need, you need to cut it into roughly one-inch cubes. You can't put this Pru a projector. It's already - it would never go through a projector, they said what the hell, got nothing to lose. The first scan took a weekend. We were paging through the scan data, and we saw this image appear, so roughly the middle of that. People of a certain age, and I count myself in that, you immediately recognise Eric Morecambe. You recognise him. This does actually work. The software that had been written to play the Gaumont British News didn't work on this because that relied on a spiral trace. This is a one-inch cube with a lot of edges. Graham worked on it. He got some good software working. Then the BBC got involved. He had a BBC R&D whose day job is to do the really cool fun stuff. He took what Graham and myself had worked on, and wrote some other software. He did a lot of statistical methods to try to identify where the acetate layer is because it merged, bridging layers of the goo of the film layer bridges the acetate. He did a lot of stats on this and was able to even account for the warping, because these are warped layers. And start extracting full frames. The software was written. Then attempt to process this as close to automatically as possible. The software wrote at Queen Mary was manual. This was automatic. It produced some really nice images. It takes about three to six minutes per layer. So each block, each one-inch cube is roughly six to nine hours. But you don't get complete texture near the edges. Part of that is when you laser-cut the film, you're not putting it on an image boundary. We get one and a half to two images in a block. Those are not always complete images. Adam word hard on this. Some of this was published on the BBC R&D blog around Christmas time this year. My phone started going mad. I saw this on Twitter. This is what you've been working on, isn't it at Christmas? We scanned about 35 blocks. The film is degrading the whole time. Each one takes a weekend to scan. We had other commitments with things we needed to scan, so we couldn't always be scanning film. So we ended up, we did a complete circuit of the outside of the reel of one-inch cubes and cut a radial section through to the centre of the reel, the time periods. The other thing is that an audio recording of this existed. Some guy in Australia made a reel-to-reel tape-recording of this on the TV. This is what we have so far. 
Video "Beautifully as well. Not a word out of sync. I'm not miming now, it's ... . [Laughter]. You realise of course it would take us ... . How does he do it? It's a thrill working with a small little genus. It's me who is talking now. I'm not talking like big ... 
There we unfortunately fade out. This is still work in progress. We hope to get it for Christmas. That's some of the abuse of CT scanners. We're getting near - it had no reason everyone to work. A welcome aside, a total abuse of CT scanners. This is my lab. I sit at that desk for a sizeable portion of the day. Near a CT scanner, processing CT results. If you've got this, you can scan what you like. Of course you do. One day, I had an Apple for lunch. There was a hole in it. I didn't realise that until I was about to take a bite out of it. Use it as a radiography machine. We wanted to see the maggot. No, I put it in. There was no maggot in my apple. I posted this up to twitter. Any guesses? Jellied eels. But the day you don't CT the apple you take in for lunch and take a bite out of it, this is what happened! [Laughter].  In this is what we did for one of our students at work. Any guesses what this is ? The iPhone was running when we put it in there. We wondered what does the camera see as it goes past the X-ray emitter. It screws up the backlight ing and stuff. The white dots are X-ray photons hitting the detector. I'm  surprised it lasted as long as it did. We bought some Pound Shop USB hubs. They didn't work. They took the back off. If you look at the pins for these USB ports, they're all in parallel. That doesn't work. What is under the black blob, then? Nothing! [Laughter]. There's bond-out pads. Someone must have sat down and done this as a practise for how the lay out of a PCB. That's the end of my talk for now. Thank you! [Applause]. 
>> Thank you, David. David will take questions in the bar. Thank you all very much for listening.