The (Connected) House of Horrors by Terence Eden.
 >> We're open for feedback on the website. Can we have a round of applause for Terence Edwards and his talk. [Applause]. 
>> Good afternoon, EMF. Thank you so much for coming here. My name is Terence Eden. I need to tell you three things about this talk. The first thing is this does contain some mention of sex and death. If that's not for you, that's all right. Please go to one of the other talks. That's absolutely fine. For everyone else, I assume you have parental permission to be here. The second thing - this is personal talk, doesn't reflect the views of my employers, past, present, or future - and the third thing to say this is all absolutely true. Everything I tell you today is true. I've not exaggerated it for comic effect. A lot of this comes from my life, and citation s are available on request. I've been building smart home things I guess for about ten years now, and, from automated plug sockets, to really quite complex interplays with different things within my house. Let me tell you, it is an absolute nightmare! It is one of the worst things that I've ever done, and I encourage you not to go into the field of smart homes. It will ruin your life! I'm going to start talking you through some of the kit that I've got, and why it is so personal. So the first thing which I think most people will have, give me a cheer if you've got a smart TV. Of course. Give me a cheer if you read the driver agreement that came with your TV! Liar. No-one does. This is interesting. Smart TVs offer us something really quite cool. If you've got iPlayer, or YouTube, 4OD, you're making a trade-off, the convenience of watching whatever you want whenever you want but the privacy trade-off is someone now actually knows what it is you watch, when you watch it, which bits you rewind and watch again and again and which bits you fast-forward through. Maybe that's an okay trade-off. Hopefully, you get better-quality TV and in exchange, you give away your demographic data. Things start setting dicey. The reason that I know so many few people read the driver licence agreements of their TVs. Samsung released a TV that had a microphone in it. You can bark at your TV and tell it to turn up the volume, whatever it is. Buried deep was this wonderful sentence, "Please be aware that if your spoken words include sensitive or other information, that information will be among the data captured and transmitted through a third-party through your voice of voice recognition. Anything you say in front of your TV can and will be used against you." This is not a theoretical concern. Samsung put out a press release people should just try to avoid having sensitive conversations in front of their TV. Do not argue with your spouse in front of the TV otherwise you will start seeing adverts for divorce lawyers. It's basically what they're saying. We've sort of just blindly put these things in our homes, and microphones, and all sorts of things, and they listen to us. Oh, my goodness, they do so much more. It is quite dreadful. There's a company called Visio who didn't just look at what iPlayer stuff you were looking at but analysed the video feed of everything you put euro TV. They could tell what DVD you were watching by sampling the video feed and sell it to advertisers. They were fined $2.2 million for this gross privacy violation. You can extract a lot of data about someone, their tastes, habits, sexuality, age, all sorts of things from what videos they watch this is just being sent back to advertisers, and who knows where. I think that's a real weird privacy trade-off. We joke, you know, in Soviet Russia, you don't watch TV, TV watches you. It is now a reality. Your smart TV is probably doing that. These are cloud pets just £39.99. You're a high-powered business executive, and you can't be bothered to see your kid. While you're out on the road, you speak into the cloud pet app and say,"I love you very much" and whatever it is people say to their kids. Your voice comes out of the toy. It's so cute and cool. The people who designed it just didn't know that security was a thing. [Laughter].  It turns out that you could go on to an unsecured website they had and look at the recordings people had left for their kids. That's not creepy. Or the recordings kids had left for their parents, or you could inject your own recordings into one else's cloud pet. "Send me Bitcoins!" It's just awful. This company said with the security fears are overblown. I don't think these are on sale any more which is probably a good thing. Lots of good people are training their kids to be complicit in their own privacy violations. I think that's a bad lesson to teach kids. I don't know. So, I used to drive a BMW but I'm much better now. [Laughter].  Before this was the electronic BMW, because I'm a cool ecohippy. This is not a car, this is a computer that you put your body inside. This has a permanent 3G connection. BMW used to have an API for their cars so you could do cool things like unlock them, and sound the horn, from their app, but they locked that down. What do hackers do when they are told not to do something! Hack the mainframe. BMW didn't feel security was a thing, didn't do any certificate pinning. I was able to extract the certificate from the app and now I can control my car from my Raspberry Pi. That's probably secure, that's probably fine! [Laughter].  Now, the other thing, so I said, you're putting your body in a computer. Let me refine that, because it gets worse. You're putting your body in an unpatched Linux box! Now, I know what you're thinking. How do I know that it's an unpacked Linux box? The infotainment system, if you press the right buttons, they say parts of the system are licensed under the GPL. I said my car has GPL. Can I have your source codes. Uploaded to GitHub, had a look at that. Really not good. I love Linux. Some of my best friends run Linux but I'm not sure I want to put my body in an unpatched Linux machine. It gets worse: if you want to update your car's firmware, the connection isn't wrong enough, they will send you a USB stick. If you get a random USB stick in the mail, it must be official, it's got the word "BMW" establishes I would on it. It just gets worse and worse. Having IoT stuff in my house is expensive. I thought I need security cameras. These are cheap Chinese security cameras and basically fine. They display an image, and I can see it on my phone. But the company that I bought them through who managed the platform for viewing them went bust. So I can't - I paid good money for these. They stopped offering the services. So I couldn't use them any more which was really unfortunate so I ended up with these lumps of plastic. I'm going to teach you how to Hackney security camera. You need a paper clip. Unbend the paper clip by 90 degrees. Shove it in the reset hole, and, boom, these cameras unlock. So once I did that, they were unlocked from the manufacturer. So the default user name for all of these was "administrator". Can anyone guess what the default password was? "Password"! That of course was a trick question. There was no password! [Laughter]. [Applause] I reset the cameras, I can do a firmware dump and see they are running Linux. I say there are Linux in your cameras. Can I have the source? They went no. I downloaded it. Someone else decompiled it, and they went I found the default telnet password in here. I have root over the cameras because the only way to configure them is using IE7. It just gets worse. You can reset more or less any security camera. So the one on the left there is an external security camera which has a PIN on it. There is a good chance there is a hole which says reset. It's not good, is it? It gets worse and worse. Matthew gave a brilliant talk about Wi-Fi lightbulbs. I'm going to talk about Wi-Fi light switches which are infinitely worse. The thing about light switches, I've got one of these complicated things in my kitchen with a bank of four bulbs. I can't afford to replace all eight bulbs with live - Lifex. I found bugs in the firmware. Asumming a light switch is really good. This is a Lambon one. They sold this on the Amazon been you writer it in, connect to your Wi-Fi. I wondered how does this Wi-Fi light switch work? There is no real security on it. I stuck up a proxy and found out what it does. It makes a permanent connection to an IP address in China. That's probably fine. [Laughter].  Who among us doesn't have a ... yeah. I thought, well, what is this server running? I did a net stat on it and the server my light switch connects to runs Microsoft windows. Vista! [Laughter]. I'm sure it's secure. All the app is sends the serial number of your light switch to this server in China. The serial number is only seven digits long, so you can enumerate through all of them and turn off random people's light switches. You shouldn't do that - that's bad and naughty - but you could, and that is terrifying. It just gets worse and worse. There was an Android app that comes with these light switches. For some reason, it wasn't allowed on the Google Play Store. So I had to download it from a non-SSL site in China, and these are the permissions that my light switch app asked me for. That's too many. Why does my light switch need to make premium rate phone calls! I mean, so some of them location, so, if I move out of a geofenced area and turn the lights on and off and record audio, modify the contents of my storage. It is a light switch. It doesn't need to do these things. These were sold for £20 or £30 on Saddam Amazon. That is part of the problem. A lot of the home automation stuff we buy is cheap, and there's no business model in supporting it once you've bought it. You've paid the 30 quid and that's it. They don't really care but any more. I would like to say because it's cheap president BMWi3 is an expensive car if they're not doing regular firmware updates for it, although that's a good thing. Do I want to drive around in something that's only just been tested? I don't know. This is the Nest smoke alarm. It is without a doubt one of the worst smart home things I got. It just eat batteries. I put in a bunch of AA batteries and it complained I had given it the wrong brand of batteries. I've never met something that was so fussy. A lot of these smart home things are designed for single people living solitary lives. So when I started this, I had an accountant on my phone, and I could see what my smoke alarm was doing but no way to get my other family members an account on my smoke alarm so they could know when the house was burning down which they might want to know. The only way to do it was by giving them the same user name and password. I think a lot of these IoT things are designed by bros in Silicon Valley who live by themselves because nobody likes them. With light switch apps, there is one app, and no-one else in the house can have it. There's also dodgy stuff with the home automation stuff where it starts to get used for domestic abuse as well. You can say, well, I'm not going to tell you what the password for the lights is. I control the lights in the house and you don't. That can get very abusive. I find that weird and strange. But the thing about the Nest, the reason why I hated it, I was on holiday, I thought I'm a little paranoid. I'm going to check to see if my house has burned down. I don't know what I was going to do if it was. I opened up the app. This is what I saw. "To continue using your Nest, you must agree to the terms of service, read the website privacy policy, the cookie policy and the privacy statement." "I agree". This is my product, I've paid money for it, installed in my house, and I'm told you can't use this unless you read four legal documents and agree to them. What if I don't agree to them. This thing that I've bought is no longer under my control. I find that a bit troubling and strange that we are now trusting companies who may go bust, they may change their privacy policy. I will be quite honest, I couldn't be bothered to read four different privacy policies. I have no idea what I've agreed to. Maybe it means they can come in wallpaper my house. It would be lovely if they did but I don't think they will. It troubles me. It gets worse and worse. Give me a cheer if you've got an Alexa or similar smart speaker thing! [Cheering] fools! So, let's just stick a listening device in our living rooms. We can order nachos quicker! We're now entering this really weird phase of human existence where society hasn't quite caught up with the 20th century, and some of us are living in the 21st century with gadgets. Those of you who have got a smart speaker like this, assuming you have friends, when you have friends who come over to your house, do you say, "By the way, there's something which might always be listening to you?" Should you? Should you assume they understand what it is? Do you need a privacy policy when someone comes round for biscuits? Just click "I agree" on the doorbell to come in. I'm going to build an IoT doorbell which does that! Million-dollar idea. So things like the Echo, one of the reasons I find them a bit troubling, there are many reasons. So one is we are teaching kids that they don't need to say please and thank you to this disembodied female voice, and she will always do what you say. This is a very sad story. A guy had some friends round, and one was found the next morning face down drowned in the hot tub. The police assumed that this was murder or foul play, and as well as searching the house, doing all the normal stuff that police do, they went to Amazon and said, "We've got a search warrant for this guy's Alexa. We want everything single thing that he said. Background noises, stuff like that." Is that okay? I don't know whether it is legal or socially acceptable. I don't know how I feel about something in my house that is casually recorded, and - Amazon, to their credit turned round and said, "No, we will fight this in court. We want to protect our customers' privacy, which is nice. And, it looked like it might go courts, and - I object, overruled" the guy whose Echo was, I would quite like the police to have it because I believe my Echo will exonerate me. And how do I feel about having something listening in my home which may prove that I'm not guilty of a crime? Eventually, the case was dropped, the police I think realised that the guy had drank too much and then drowned, but it starts - it sort rubs me up the wrong way that we have listening device that is may or may not be used against us. It gets worse. They didn't necessarily need the search warrant for the Echo, because in a statement, another smart device, his water heater points an exorbitant amount of water use in the early hours would lead a investigator to believe he was covering up a crime. If you've got a smart water metre, any of these smart devices which are constantly recording every sent minute what is going on in your hole, which of those points to you being guilty of something? It gets worse. It guess worse and worse. I talked about computers we put our bodies inside. What about the computers we put inside our bodies? Does anyone know what this is an X-ray of? A pacemaker, well done. This is a science-y term. It keeps your heart going, basically. It is a computer. We've got computers inside us now. They are usually built cheaply, and the companies which build them don't pay much attention to security. What we find is that lots of these pacemakers, if you go online, you can find out what the default password is for them. It is not a long password. If you've got a laptop and an antenna shoved into your USB port, you can start reading off pacemaker data from someone. You can write data to the pacemaker as well. So usually, what happens if the heart goes into - I'm not a medical doctor or any sort of doctor, once the heart goes funny, the pacemaker can give it a zap of electricity, and you're still alive. If you know the default password and close enough, reprogramme someone's pacemaker so it doesn't provide that jolt of electricity, or too much, or something else. These devices inside us are not under our control. Not almost anyone, almost anyone in this room could go up and literally reprogramme your heart. It gets worse. This is another case. This guy said, "I woke up and someone had set fire to my house so I quickly packed my bags, jumped through the window. It was awful." The police and fire went, "We think you did. We're going to subpoena your pacemaker data to find out whether you did it or not, whether your heart activity was consistent with the story that you told us." Now, again, I don't necessarily want to get into whether this is legal in this jurisdiction, or legal here, because I really don't know. But there is a computer inside your body which is not only not under your control, will betray you if asked. It will give up your secrets. And that worries me. Because we are seeing more and more people, whether it is cochlear implants, heart things, all sorts of crazy - amazing, we're rebuilding humanity, but there's a default password, and any hacker on the internet can slurp what your hurt was doing last night. It worries me - really worries me. It just gets worse and worse. This is where we get to the juicy topic of sex. Now, we're going to be talking about teledildonics - "tele" meaning distance, and "dildonics" meaning an offensive slogan painted on the back of a campervan. It was the last one they had, I'm so sorry. I'm not here to kink-shame people but to security-shame some people. This is the We Vibe, a vibrator connecting to your smartphone via Bluetooth. You can control it from your phone, and you can also set up an account with someone else, and they can control your vibrator from their phone while they are in the comfort of their own bus, or train seat, or wherever they happen to be to control it. This uses Bluetooth. That's not terrifically secure. What that means if you know what the default pairing key is of this vibrator, you can just pick up your phone, scan, find them, connect, and activate it. You can commit serious sexual assault from your phone via Bluetooth. That's not funny. This is a problem that people might be wearing these thinking only my trusted partner or myself can use these, but in actual fact, anyone with a Bluetooth phone or laptop can do it. Now, the other problem with this is that, we talked again, so, give me a cheer if you've read the privacy policy on your vibrator. [Isolate the shouts from audience]. Liar! No-one does. If people had read the privacy policy on this vibrator, they would have realised that the company which manufactures this takes diagnostic information, so every time it is used, they get a record of where you were when you used it, how long you used it for, the intensity of the vibrations, when you stopped using it, and your internal body temperature. Did anyone tick the box says yes, I consent to my internal body temperature being sent? There's been lawsuits over this. It is worrying, and it's scary, and it gets worse. It gets so much worse. So, this is another internet-connected sex toy. I know what some of you are thinking. Mine doesn't look like that. Yours doesn't have a camera on the end whereas this one does! No, no. What people want to do in the privacy of their own internet connection is their own business. But are you ready for your close up? [Applause] You cannot stream HD video over Bluetooth so they put a Wi-Fi logo on there. Wi-Fi has a fantastic range. You know, a couple of hundred metres if you're lucky with good antennas. This does attenuate somewhat if it is surrounded by a body, but, you can listen in on this Wi-Fi signal. Again, the company just didn't think of setting a strong password on this. If you find the Mac address broadcasting when you're in the hotel, you can take control of this. You can see what someone is doing with this. You can commit sexual voyeurism, an offence in this country, with a Wi-Fi connection, because people don't understand what it is they're buying. When you buy internet-connected things, you're sacrificing a part of your privacy unless you're absolutely on top of all of these things, and read every single privacy policy every time they're updated. You could open yourself up to a huge world of pain, or embarrassment where or blackmail, or anything. And it gets worse. It gets worse and worse. Every time we buy something with an internet connection, it sort of eats away at our privacy a little. No-one, no normal user is reading privacy policies. No normal user is changing their default settings. No normal user is changing their password on their sex toys. It just doesn't happen. It gets worse and worse. Everything is terrible. Everything is absolutely terrible. And I have no idea as a community how we fix it. Thank you very much. Cheers! [Applause] If you don't get your question answered, I will in the bar all afternoon. There is a question there and then there. 
>> Sex toys aside, we're coming to a time, no matter how much money you can spend or willing to spend, you can't buy a consumer product, be it a TV, a smart metre, whatever, had a is not horribly laughably insecure. Do you see this changing in the near future, that there will be a line of consumer products for people like us who care about this stuff? 
>> For people like us, we can build our own. I jailbroke those smart cameras so I had complete control of them. Most people can't be bothered to do that. There might be a case for a privacy-focused one but I think it would be very expensive or, in the case of Amazon Echo, they realised that I think they realised if they breach their customers' privacy too much, people will abandon them. With laws like GDPR, that's going to make things stronger, but the problem is, as I said, when we go to Amazon, or Alibaba, we tend to sort by lowest price first, not by highest privacy first. The problem is us as much as it is the manufacturer. I don't see it improving any time soon, I'm sorry. 
FLOOR:  In a couple of weeks, it is very possible I'm going to become a developer of precisely this kind of kit in a start-up organisation of about ten people where it's painfully obvious I'm the only one who has the vaguest concept of security. Do you have any thoughts on how to educate the highly intelligent, highly motivated people who have no concept of security in the rest of the organisation? 
>> You should, and kudos to you for selling telling them that. What you can do with founders is show them the fines which people have been given, so, as I said with Visio in the States, 2.2 million, I think Cloud Pets had a big out-of-court settlement. Showing people the money is good. I think telling people the stories of privacy, and I remember talking to a developer years ago who was saying, when people get a new app, don't they automatically flick through all the settings and see what they like? Normal people don't do that. What I would recommend is doing user-testing. If you've got an app, go down to a coffee shop, get real users, buy them a coffee, and say can you use this app and tell me what you think, see how many read the privacy policy and do things. I think showing people that there is a monetary problem and a society problem, and their users don't really understand or care, I think that's a good way, but I'm not sure that it's been successful yet. But, yes, do come and chat with me afterwards. Any more for any more? 
FLOOR:  Hi, are you running a bug bounty on your hacks? - on your house. 
>> A bug bounty on my house? Yes, I am, and you get delicious home-cooked cookies which unfortunately have been cooked by me and will not be very tasty! It's very interesting. So, trying to - I've got virgin Media at home, and their smart hub, and there is no meaningful firewall on that. I think there's a question right at the back there. So, it is really hard, as a home user to secure your home without buying more and more stuff. I think there's a question there, and there, and, if time for more, if not, you can buy me a drink. 
FLOOR:  I was wondering what you think about this perhaps being perhaps a consumer rights issue that our law hasn't really caught up. Thinking back to even what we see with mobile apps, something's gone terribly wrong with the software model we've got where users are forced to accept upgrades to continue to get functionality, and functionality is taken away. Things like I think about my Sonos speakers on a monthly basis, forced to accept new software. It's not possible to get an instalment of the app. 
>> A good example is the Nest smoke alarm. The original Nest I've got touted a feature if the alarm was going on and a false alarm, you could stand under it and wave. They discovered their firmware was unable to tell the difference between a person waving and black billowing smoke! I mean, they're pretty easy to confuse. They disabled that functionality. I'm kind of glad they did but that's something they've turned off which I paid for. At the moment, I don't think there is a consumer rights movement for that, and I don't know how we fix that. I think someone at the back had a question. 
FLOOR:  Are you as worried about the recording capabilities of mobile phones as you were about Alexa, and, if not, why not? 
>> You can usually tell when your phone is recording and transmitting. It's harder with an Alexa. The mode of a smart speaker is that it's always on. You don't have to do that with your phone. I don't use Google Assistant on my phone or anything like that. It is possible that those things could be recording, and sort of doing stuff. While we are getting the next question up, I would love to take a selfie with you all, because you're all wonderful. If you could give a big EMF wave just like that. 
>> Consent! 
>> It's too late. By attending this talk, you give up all rights! [Laughter]. The GDPR does not cover my photos. 
FLOOR:  I'm curious what devices you've ended up deciding you're okay with having in your own house. 
>> All of these. It's a trade-off. Do I think that Nest are going to sell my - how often I burn toast to an advertiser? They might, but I run ad politic, so what do I care? With these cameras, I've routed them, jail-broken them. I'm confident I'm in control of them. I no longer have the i3, and my new car coming doesn't have a permanent 3G connection. We make these trade-offs. With iPlayer, I'm happy to give up a bit of privacy because they make good episodes of Doctor Who. But, you know, your trust model, your failure model would be different. I wouldn't blame anyone saying I'm having no part of this. It can be quite scary. One more. 
FLOOR:  Is there necessarily a trade-off between usability and privacy or security? 
>> Yes. Because, some people, is there a trade-off? Because you are going to have to ask users questions. Are you okay with this being stored outside of the EU? Are you okay with us doing face recognition from your smart doorbell? Every time you ask a question, that reduces usability. You shouldn't make users think too much about this. If you give them - so, I think there is a real things here the Nest is great in the sense that you just stick it up on to the wall, there's no real configuration necessary. But, you know, in a doesn't do much. It just sends you an alert saying your house is on fire. If you're doing smart door bells as want record them and send them to seven people, I think that the more interesting a smart home device you have, the more usable it is, then it's going to necessarily be a privacy problem, and trying to get people to understand the privacy trade-offs they're making for themselves, their families, for their friends coming round for the postie ringing on the doorbell, that's not something we've worked how to educate people on. I shall see you all in the bar. Cheers! [Applause]. 