Why automated number plate recognition systems suck by McFly.
>> Welcome to this talk on automated number recognition and why it sucks. We're looking for volunteers, especially around site, like AV work. An important announcement:  there is not to be any amplified music after 11 pm this evening otherwise we risk losing our ability to use this site again in future. Keep that in mind. Have a great camp and enjoy this talk. [Applause]. 
>> Does this work? This works. So, I'm kind of still stuck in here, so this will be done in a second when I've found out which button to press to get to the next slide. I have to say, I broke my laptop I was planning to do this on on this rather rugged conditions in EMF Camp. I have to do this on a Windows laptop which I'm not used to. How do I get to the next slide here? Hello! Okay. Hi, everybody. I'm giving a talk about number plates, and I actually want for a while - yes, I'm hurrying up because I waste the quite a time already. Who am I? I'm McFly. I do security-related stuff for a living but most of you possibly know me as the guy with the coins. So who of you has a coin? Yes. That's a noticeable amount. I hope you like it.   What is ANPR? People roughly know what I'm talking about? This is the UK. You seem to have quite a loft those. I'm no from the Netherlands. It also comes to medium security and related points. What is ANPR? It is automated number plate recognition. It focuses on the number plates and basically nothing else, and it tries to recognise something for that, and it's an awesome technology. This symbol shows it a bit. You usually have a camera that is triggered usually with a magnetic coil. So your car is made out of metal, and, if you have a magnetic coil in the ground, you disturb the magnetic field, and you can measure it pretty easily. That then triggers a camera. Who has ever opened a gate with a fire extinguisher? You truly understood the problem. What is it used for? It is very often used especially in the Netherlands for parking enforcement by the city, and by private people. So the parking garages have a number plate reader at the entrance that reads your number plate. You drive in, and you can't excuse yourself that you have been standing two hours in there, but also the city drives around with cars that have number-plate readers on the roof, and they try to write down who is parking, and when you go and park, you put in your number plate in the computer, so where you white-listed there, and that's how they enforce that. Beat control, I don't know how to call it in the Netherlands. In Germany and the Netherlands, it is called Trirkontrolle - section controller, something like that. There is a surprising use of law enforcement like that, looks at your camera, who is leaving the city. All this terrorism happens lately so they have to do this fancy thing.  This picture is - there is a camera tries to read the number plate from the car. This picture is taken from all the good points, which will be a point later on in the talk. Parking enforcement. That's how it looks in rot diagonal. You see the readers on top? Can you understand me well? Okay. And this is how the speed control looks in the Netherlands. I think it is pretty obvious for most of the nerds how it works. You have two points where you try to identify the moving objects over the road. You know the distance between those poles, and that allows you pretty precisely to calculate the speed of the object that was travelling over there. If you have something like - you have something like that in the UK too, right? What is it called? "Average speed"? I think I saw some of those. Yes. Yes. Law enforcement in the Netherlands, there is often what they call the environmental zone. Your car may go in or not depending on the number plate, because they do a database look up and look what emission laws your car fulfils and will directly tell you. This means the car number plate 31SHV2 mag wel in. They do a look-up there. Why do I care? That's the house I'm living in. It looks fancy. It has a parking garage and the architecture wanted to be fancy, so he put number plate readers in there. I hate that. Because it's like the Netherlands. I'm from Germany and I'm used to some things called privacy, laws and those things, but basically, I at some point tried to ask how long do you stop that? - where do you store it? When do you delete it? What do you mean, delete? Since the construction of the building, all the bookings were still in the computer. I think that's a pretty average case. So alone from the privacy standpoint, it's worth looking into those things. Does any one of you know the term GDPR? If you have a parking garage, like the European decided, number plates are private data, just saying.  So, this is a symbol ic pick of this. I got annoyed about that, and I tried to talk to the vendor about that. First, my house, and basically nobody cared. They said but the vendor said it's like really secure. Very secure. I work as a security consultant, so that means most times, I actually go to other people and smart ass about their security, sometimes better. I didn't have an assignment at times, and, in my company, you can play around with stuff when you don't have an assignment, and this is also built in our company parking garage, so I had a bit of a bit of opposition to talk to the surrender about this. "This is very secure. Experts tried. Believe us." So, yeah. The system works, you have a car, there's a magnetic coil in the ground. A  camera takes a picture. That's a car, or the computer, just saying. Then the computer decides to get access. Technology working behind that is an infrared camera that works with the flash, the picture gets underexposed, if you do that, that's how it looked. This is a symbolic picture of another car from the side with a camera shot in roughly that setting. You see very quickly those reflective stuff, and you see what is standing there. So, what happens with that. The system looks up a database if you're allowed to go in and then right. Clear everybody still to here? [Sound breaking up]. So I thought a number plate, faking a number plate, that's really hard, right, because this is defined, and all of the stuff, so, I tried to get some reflective foil to play with around our garage. Turns out they don't sell it in the Netherlands, like the yellow tone. I don't know about the infrared at that point. You can't easily buy it in the Netherlands. The online dealers from Germany where the number plates are white have zero problems selling that to you! So internet. Buying this, this stuff, is sold in square metres. So, I got told the roll, where you cut them from is 1.22m wide and the minimum they can cut is one metre, so that is the stuff that you play with, you get from that. Yes. I think that is the point where I wanted to put in the video. Yes. So I got bored, as I said, so this is a very short video. You see what is happening there? Fire extinguisher. [Off mic].  [No sound]. There, I guess.  ... problems you have when you have to deal with Windows. Okay. Let's just do this. So I can't see my display. That's why I'm not putting it easily in full screen. I think it shows basically the general problems. It's a rather short video. The fire extinguisher makes your car, holding a number plate makes you have a number plate, and then you have access to the garage. So, wait, there is still half. So I didn't think there was like, like I was annoyed about that. I made a tweet about that, and, for my numbers, in a became very successful, and 50,000 people retweeted that. So I thought I must underestimated that. What else? I'm very sure every one of you has seen this picture. [Laughter]. That is not from me. That is a random picture pulled off the internet. I thought it's a stupid idea, an awesome idea but too many characters. So I tried this with my car. Can you see that? The ideas that you want to get access, so dropping the database isn't helping you very much. So, if you want to get access, you would rather try to do something like, like closing the things in 101, 1=1 which is always true. Yes. It doesn't work in our system. After I posted this video online, I got contacts two that work in this area. The earlier system that we had, which is still very common runs on a Windows 2003 server. It requires Microsoft mySQL for version 3. The most difficult part is getting the spaces right. I would encourage you to try that in other situations, because I was told after that our software doesn't work with a different number. So, why is there so much of the problem? Because the - it doesn't end here. Do you remember the automated, right? Number plates is not a collision-free name space. And a lot of those software requirements for this kind of software is written by government who always think, "We're from the Netherlands, so number plates are unique." We're in the Netherlands, but you can find number plates that are valid number plates in Germany. Just look at the string there. Have you ever seen a truck from the front? Seriously, on the highway, look for that. You will see that they have number plates in their windscreen. Usually, it's their name. If you talk to them, they say they're you a Sol, half of the speed controls don't work any more. So, yes, and there is another thing that I left the slide out because it's looking at the time, I think I'm nearly through soon. Anyway, yes. Another thing is this works over reflector, so, if every one wants to play around with that, don't do that, because licence plates are legally protected. There is a law at some point that says a licence plate is an identifier and it points to somewhere else for technical references. If you ever play around with this, remember, these are infrared readers. Red works fine. That's legally not a number plate. Because lies some have yellow, white, in your country, you have both. But in the beginning, I was very much in copying exactly the right tone of the colour, and trying to mask that, and you possibly saw earlier in the slides here this, so at the beginning, I put a lot of effort, actually, in creating those, not number plates, the upper one is made with masking tape, pretty exactly the font that I need. The lower one is with a Sharpie. I can draw this with one stroke for a thick Sharpie per number. When you think about it, what do those things do? This is good weather. But this is required to work in shitty weather, in snow. If you look at how the systems work and think to be where your car, where do your headlights point? Pretty much at this thing. If you try to take a picture against the snow with a light against something, it's very, very hard. Those number plate writers are fault -tolerant when it comes to writing something. Yes, your handwriting, it will most likely be completely fine, and, they use this to protect - I will put it in a different way - an area where access that write the secrets to access the area in clear text on the outside of that object. Did any of you look at authentication protocols and so on? That doesn't sound like a good idea for me. I would invite you all to play around with that. A security professional person, if you want to take this back to software development or anything. Whatever renders wrong here, failing to identify user-generated input. Because, if you start looking at the automated number plate, we are completely user-generated input because I can glue patterns of reflective and non-reflective foil on my car as long as I want to, and as long as it is not number plate, but the computer doesn't know, so, you're actually dealing with user-generated input. There are other things that I do, so I did this thing about barcodes, that has the same problem. Really quickly, you think if you want to work with barcodes, also deal with that problem, that very often you just have user-generated input. That is not properly identified by the software developer to actually really ... [Laughter]. Work with this way. So, for a lot of those people who work in security, the essence of this talk should be about how you really identified what you're dealing with, that machine-generated input. If you take a picture and through it through an OCR library, and push that against databases or other systems in your system, that possibly is not a good idea, so, yes. Questions? You sir. 
>> Do you know if anyone has done a Freedom of Information request on their licence plate data like these average speed correctors? 
>> By the way, it works hilarious. But, yes, it is private data, which is recorded by the government, so, over here, where you have a stronger information request, that might be an interesting thing to ask. . 
FLOOR:  What is the yellow reflective stuff called? 
>> ScotchLite3D M. It is reflective foil. It's used for those security things on cars and trucks and all of those things. Look at your average foil or tarp dearly has no problems getting that. A square metre is around EUR5. 
FLOOR:  You showed the picture of the police car with the retro reflective on the front. Does that affect it in the same way as the number plate? 
>> You mean that it also, this system will detect the police car? 
FLOOR:  Yes, or will it ... - 
>> For legal reasons, I have not tried the word Polizei, but I would not be surprised if there are whitelists in those security, for like the ambulance, and the police. But that is speculation. Yes, it gets read. Everything that is reflective gets read. If you put a company advertisement in a reflective on your car, already quite a problem for those. If you look where you legally are allowed to put your number plates on your car, above the screen, like above the windscreen, and very much down at the car, allowed you to move it to the sides. The area for number plates is big which leaves a lot of space for drawing things. It would be interesting to have a capture on your windscreen and reflective. Another question. One over there. 
>> Are there any easy waits of putting an infrared message on the car that [inaudible]. 
>> Yes, what you can do is make your car reflective, or an area on that, like I guess white, for example, and then you can write on there with white non-reflective foil. That is really, really hard to see. That's actually so hard to see. So hard to see, I wasn't able to make a picture from that. But I was recommended to leave all of those practical examples I have at home because I have to go with this border, and your British border guys really don't understand humour! Or science. [Laughter]. . . 
FLOOR:  Do you know the window tinting film, the dark stuff, lets through infrared, but visible to the eye, you can't see it, so you can easily hide a number plate that can't see but cameras can? 
>> Yes, you can do quite a lot of things with that. Like it's one of those things where in the beginning, I just see like that's a rabbit hole. I wonder how deep that goes. If you start thinking about that, and looking in those details, there's so much fun in that. Like, yesterday, somebody told me an example where we found an example that we could verify with a number plate that existed in Germany and the Netherlands, so, automated, verifying this over different countries with colliding name spaces, that's pretty challenging in automatic, right? I mean, a lot of you write software.  Are there any more questions? Over there? 
FLOOR:  This is bordering on hypothetical I word if, could you do the same trick as putting white on white over a number plate, so what you end up with is one big black square that, to the visible eye looks like a number plate but to the camera looks like a black square. 
>> That wouldn't work easily because I haven't found reflective back so far. In infrared, it might work. Not the expert on that. I guess the biggest problem would be finding a reflective black. That's, "Can I get some of that?" [Laughter]. [Inaudible]. Nice. Yes, I would like to have some of that, please. You'll find me at ... if you have some of that, I would like to have that. Does anyone else have a question. I will take one more question if there is one? Three, two, one. Okay been there is one. That was just in time.
>> I already had a question. E-ink? 
>> Maybe. I haven't tried. I didn't get my fingers on an e-ink that is big enough but that might be an interesting approach, yes. Thank you all for coming at this early time of the day. I hope you didn't have hangovers and that was horrible because of that. Yes, the EMF is mostly over, but if you go to Hacker Camp again, come over and drink some beer, whisky, cider, whatever there, and enjoy it. I hope you all enjoyed this EMF camp! [Applause]. 