Why Does Pizza: Mean "I love you" - The ways that we use and misuse emoji by Sarah Wiseman.
>> Thank you for being here this afternoon on a lovely sunny Sunday. My name is Dr Sarah Wiseman and I'm a lecturer at Goldsmiths. The fact I've got doctor in my name is nothing to do with emojis! I'm going to quote from the dictionary. I'm not sure if all of you know this, but every year, Oxford English Dictionary choose a word of the year. They choose it in order to represent what was happening in that year. What really in one word tells you what was happening in that year. They're all really depressing. Get ready more the most recent ones, vape, selfie, and the post-truth, and omnishambles. Now, can anyone tell what the word of the year was in 2015? Yes, someone can. Emoji. Are you agent saying it's the word "emoji"? Does anyone else want to have a go? What do you think it was? What? For love. Very good guessing. The word of the year in 2015, according to Oxford English Dictionary was laughing face with tears of joy. Ox ox were proud to announce their first pictograph. Why did they choose this emoji [?] they chose it the because the word "emoji" and the amount of emojis we were using in 2015 was astronomical, seen an amazing rise in popularity. They working out which was the most popular emoji that year working with Swiftkey, and it was laughing face with tears of joy. I can tell you that since 2017, it has stopped being the most popular emoji. I will let you decide what could have happened in the year 2016 to make everybody in the world less happy! It's absolutely appropriate there should be an emoji word of the year because emoji are so, so important to us. Even if you don't like it, lots of people out there are using it. There are 60 million emojis used every day on Facebook. I can tell you that with thanks to my friends at Cambridge Analytica! 60 million is a massive amount, and it's quite incredible, isn't it? I mean, it's incredible how relatively small that massive amount is. On Facebook Messenger alone, 5 billion emoji are used every single day. Emoji are here to stay, and they matter to us. Did you know that you are twice as likely to open a marketing email if there is an emoji in the subject line? So the next time you do that, be aware that you're being gamed very seriously. They're here to stay. We use 2.3 trillion emoji in 2016 on various messaging apps across various platforms. They're really, really important. Now, I probably don't need to tell you all of that. Most of you have used an emoji today, in fact,. I want to tell you about this this is important to me - me in emoji form! I need to tell you a story. So, I'm going to tell you a story about my friend. My friend wanted to buy herself a new house. As you all know, they cost a lot of money, so she was saving for absolutely ages. She had done everything they could think of to save money. Even moved in with her mum and dad. They will not thank me for representing them like that! Don't tell them I've used those emoji! She had even done the almost impossible thing of giving up avocado on toast! [Laughter]. So, after all of that work, and all of that effort that she had put in, I was absolutely thrilled when, last year, I got a text from her. It is finally happened, we exchanged on the house. She finally found this dream house. She had been working so hard, changing everything about her life. Finally, this had happened to her. I was thrilled. I was overjoyed. I was ecstatic. So I responded in the only way I knew how - yes ... yes ... okay. That response, it turns out was the same response she had! [Laughter]. I hadn't really thought when I sent that reply. Thousand, that reply of streamers means something to me and one other person on the planet who also happens to be in this room. Me and my sister had been sending cart streamers to each other for a lot of years. We can't work out we've been doing it. It means I'm thrilled and ecstatic. Wahey. I was sending a really positive message, and she didn't acknowledge it. Neither did you all. So I'm quite offended. But it made me realise, actually, there's this weird thing that me and Amy are doing, I'm going to forget to call her sister - there's a weird thing we are doing. I wanted to know more about this. I've always known that me and Amy are special - my mum always tells us this! But are we special enough that we are the only ones doing this? Are we the only ones out there using emoji for a different purpose just with one other person? So, it became two questions: one, do people repurpose emoji and use them for things they shouldn't? Two, are they doing it with one other person to create a bond? Let's answer that first question. Are there people out there repurposing emoji? Yes. What do you mean by repurpose. Every year, the Unicode Consortium meet and assign a name to each of the new emoji. For example, this emoji is called eggplant, or as most people in this room will know that it's an aubergine, and we don't use the world eggplant. They give them these names. That means there's a disconnect. It means that we as users of these emoji never sees those titles or names. We just see them in pictorial form which often means that we are - we give them our own meaning. We can assign them to something else. The Unicode consortium get to decide on what new emoji we get. This year, they created one for your EMF tent in the night-time. The chilly-freezing face. It means we get a lot of new emoji and we don't know what all the names are. I have a question for you:  I would like you to tell me, does anyone know what this Unicode character is in u1f351? I tell you, it has a lot with when, in 2016, Apple ruined sexting? It's the lovely peach. Apple - Apple had ruined sexting for them. The way they had done that is taken their peach emoji which had always looked like this, and they wanted to give it an update, wanted to freshen it up and redraw it. For iOS they were suggesting maybe we need to draw them in a different way. They gave us peach looking like this. People were furious. Why were they furious? Emojipedia has done a study looking at ways that people use the peach emoji and it's not that often used to mean the fruit, surprisingly. It turns out that four per cent of the time when people are using peach, they're meaning it in a sense of "Kitcheny keen and peachy cool" and things like that. Seven per cent of the time when they use this emoji, they mean the fruit. That's good. Still a lot of percentage left. 73 per cent of the time, when the peach emoji features, it's referring to a bum. Why is that? Well, technically, it's because it was like a bum. It looks like a bum. That's why. That's why people were really angry because this second incarnation people didn't really think it did the job. It wasn't looking like a bum, people said such a fuss of it that the emoji was returned to its butt-like state. It acknowledges that big tech companies are aware of the fact that we add our own meanings on to emoji, that we won't always listen to what they're called. It's likely I haven't blown anyone's mind yet. You probably already knew with the peach emoji, and so well known that we are assigning these different uses to emoji that companies are cashing in on it. This is something that Durex ... [Laughter]. I mean am I going to surprise or disappoint, or make you happy here to say that this never actually existed. This was just a marketing campaign. Sorry if that was upsetting for you! That goes to show, it is such a universal thing that we do. We add new meanings to emoji. Lots of people do it now. But that only answers my first question. We've only seen instances of people repurposes emoji at a very universal level. Let's start getting smaller. Let's start thinking about people that use emoji when they want to hide or conceal a message. Who are people worried about doing this? Worried about criminals doing it, terrorists? Dodgy politicians. No, obviously worried about differencing doing it. I'm about to show you a news clip from an American TV show that's reporting on this very, very grave matter.  
[Video] "Starting to use some as secret code we can't figure out. Often, it is a combination of emojis like a face with a zipper along with should be parents next to that zipper. That would tell you that don't tell your patients about something. The other one is a fox. That's a simple enough thing. That could be a message to someone that you want to sneak out of the house. A skull, arrow and a flame, that could be saying to someone I hope you die in a fire." [Off mic] 
>> Don't feel bad if you don't know why that means that. This is really complex stuff, okay. Anyway, you can see how sensationalist and ridiculous it is, but this is something people are concerned about and interested in, because the older generation often feel like they're wining having information concealed from them by using these types of emojis. Another thing that the older generation wrongly believe is that they can reach out to millennials and make them buy products and engage in things if they use emoji. I will do a test with you. Are you able to decipher what this emoji means? One clue to tell you is don't read it like you've ever read any emoji in your life before. Does anybody have any guesses about what it could mean? My gosh, the young person in the audience. Have a go.  Okay, that was going to be surprisingly prophetic in a moment. 
>> I hope that you put away all the bad stuff and start working out and getting more healthy, and getting a more sex y bum, and for the bottom one, stop smoking.
>> Thank you very much! [Applause]. That's got quite it, and I wouldn't be surprised - this is "I want to fit in but I don't want to smoke." Argh, that's so hopelessly trendy. Anyone who came in smoking is just going to give up now, I imagine, because that's effective as a message, isn't it(!) This is an astonishing piece of marketing that a company tried to release in order to engage millennials and young people in their messages about giving up drugs and smoking. They thought we will do it with emoji. I want to show you how badly these messages can be interpreted. Emojis don't always have a single meaning. This came to my attention because of a linguist who was sent to this book to review, the Semiotics of emoji, the rise of the visual language and age of the internet. She has an incredible Twitter thread where she goes through the entire book and highlights a lot of interesting parts to it. I will link to the thread at the end but I want to highlight this one. You remember what this meant. It said, "I want to fit in but I don't want to smoke." The author of this book, an academic, obviously thought they knew best, decided it meant the following were clears] "I'm tired of drink ing to fit in like an ant, I need to be strong and not take drugs." What on earth - I have no clue where that has come from. "I want to fit in like an ant." This is astonishing. This is a published book, and this is the tip of the iceberg in terms of the types of translations that this author offers for emoji. But my point being that sometimes we try to assign different meanings to emoji and sometimes we are worried that teenagers are doing it, and sometimes we do not have a clue what we are saying. Anyway. We've talked about the universal repurposes, about the case where everyone in the world knows what it means. A lot of people know what it means. We've talked about this instance where teenagers might know what the secondary meanings mean, but you know what? We still haven't got to cart streamers. It is at that point that my research comes in. There was no-one writing about this as far as I could tell. No-one talked about repurposes emoji with one other person to create a bond. I decided to run a research experiment. I surveyed just over 0 people and asked them if they had an - 70 people that they reused and gave a different meaning to when talking to another person. I would love to share the results with you now. So, the most commonly repurposed emoji was the octopus. Lots of people reported using that for other meanings. Some of of them lovely, some darker. A lot darker. So that was a one of the most common ones we found. The most commonly used pet name is penguin in emoji speak. If you do it, you're not special! [Laughter]. Loads of people are doing it. Come up with something better. That was the most commonly used pet named, when people wanted to refer to loved ones in emoji speak, they would use the penguin. Lots of people reported using emoji for excitement. These are results, all of them, from my survey, apart from the top one, because I asked my sister to fill in the survey, and she did not fill in her survey. I know that I have personal experience, anecdotal experience that people are using cart streamers to show excitement, or unicorns. This obviously wouldn't be a talk about emoji without sex so other people using emoji for - to talk assembly with their partner, using the - sexily with their partner. The other one finding the least sexy one they could. Lucky them! So, emoji use for sex. Moving on to another illicit things, some people reported using it because they wanted to hide what they were doing, specifically hide the intent of their message from prying eyes, maybe the law, so, this person reported using this bugle for drugs, because bugle blows, a word for certain drugs. Emoji can be used to hide your messages when you think that they might be grabbed in the middle. Lots of people reported using emoji because there's a lovely history. For a lot of people, an emoji can evoke a lot of things. For a lot of people, it can refer to a conversation you had with someone, to a wonderful time you had with someone, refer to a funny incident you had with someone. Rather than having to say so someone, remember the time that we ... which can feel clunky or uncomfortable, emoji offer us a way to evoke something much, much larger than the emoji itself and a gateway to a shared history to encourage you to talk about something with another friend. If you wand  - if you're thinking of a another person and talking about the special time you shared, you can send an emoji which is more elegant, I think, than kind of specifically saying it in words. Other people reported using emoji because of the way that the emoji was drawn. This is very similar to what we do. Peach. Peach is repurposed to mean bum because it looks like it, and two people reported using emoji in that similar way. This top one, someone wanted to use a coffin emoji but at the time they couldn't - emoji, but they thought a person in a bath, that looks like a coffin. I respect that. I think that's cool. This bottom one with thinking face was reported to be used by people to mean lesbian. Reason being that, in American Sign Language, that is lesbian in American Sign Language. So it just so happens that the thinking face emoji can be used for that. There's no reason why it should look like that. Thinking face could be - could be a statue with a thinking face. But it's not that there's no reason there's no listening between thinking and the word lesbian but there is a link between the way it's been drawn. So the way that emoji are drawn is really important. You might have realised this if you've ever texted your emoji cross-platform, often the grimacing face can be misconstrued if you send it between an iOS device and an Android. In one it looks happy and another unhappy. It is important to understand how emoji are drawn. Other people using emoji to create ... . They're referring to their local pub, the Hatchet.  It's funny. A lot of people using emoji because it's simply funnier to do that. The British, we're not necessarily good at saying what we mean and feel, so, again, emoji are really useful way of sharing our inner most emoji - inner most emojis! Oh, my word! Help, I've gone too far! A way of sharing our inner most emotions and saying what we really mean without having to be too like honest with ourselves. So lots of people using emoji to mean,"I love you". Someone used a horse. More than one person has a particular food type they and their partner love, so I'm thinking about that food, I am thinking about that food, and I love you. Which is why pizza emoji slice means I love you. As a result of this paper, it's gone round my department. Now it means anything to all of our colleagues. We just send them willy-nilly all over the place now, but it used to mean something special to someone. This is my favourite one, I would say. Sometimes, people reported repurposes emoji just for an emotional connection. Sometimes, it's really, really hard to talk to someone. Sometimes, it's really hard to tell someone how you really feel, and, sometimes, you need to tell someone an idea, a thought, a concept, and it doesn't really have words. Lots of people reported an emoji that they use just because talking is hard. And it's true, talking is hard sometimes. Talking is really hard when we only have one medium to do it, when we only have the written word. I think that's really the beauty of emoji. Who to we talk, we use gesture, tone, touch. I think emoji give us that opportunity to add that text ure to our digital written communication. So let us add in another layer on top of what you're saying to another person. Let us tell them we are thinking about them, they let us tell them that that other person is important to you. Without having to say it. Sometimes, yes, talking is hard. Emoji let us get through that, while still creating that connection to another person, and still allowing a bond. That is the end of my talk. Thank you so much for listening. If you are into - [Applause]. If you want to read more of that paper, it can be found at the bit.ly link, if you want to read the incredible Twitter thread, it's found at the bottom link there. We do have time for questions? Brilliant. If you have emojis you use this this way, please tweet me. 
FLOOR:  Thank you for the talk. I'm crazy about emojis and Unicode. I had a question regarding a think you ... the way we see the emoji isn't part of the standard, it's part of the font that is selected by the manufacturer. Do you think that in the future there's going to be a problem with making the sense of the meaning images consistent across manufacturers, and, basically, do you think that the emojis can become like other letters that the font doesn't matter for the interpretation? 
>> That's a really good question question and certainly one I don't have a solution that I think would be appropriate. What I - I think what this has highlighted is that it's important to whatever font you do choose for your emoji, that it remains consistent, that it doesn't suddenly change mid-use. It's difficult. I don't think that the solution is to say everyone's thinking face needs to look like this, or everyone's heart needs to look like this because then we lose something. I think it's exciting that there are so many fonts and differences out there. I think one of the conclusions of our paper was not everyone needs to change so that we all use the same standard font across all platforms but it might come to that. I think the conclusion everyone needs to be aware that the way emoji are rendered and drawn needs to be considered and thought through, and can't on a whim be changed because although it may still represent the same thing, to a lot of people out there, it may become useless and not be used. I think that's a good question and one I'm not sure where it's going to go, but I'm intrigued to find out. 
FLOOR:  Did you have examples in the regional use of emojis, like festivals that might be attributed to [inaudible] and then people talk to each other that represents at that event? 
>> That's a really good question. I'm trying to think of them. I can't think of any regional ones off the top of my head. It feels like it's close to the front of my brain. I know there's a lovely paper showing you that people in different regions use emoji in different ways, but in terms of your question I can't think of any region examples but I can think of community examples. There are a few people who used emoji specific to a particular community. Forgive me if I misquote it, I haven't read it for a while, but the red flag symbol, or red, about to mess this up. Someone tweet me in tell me the answer. I believe that's representative of something in the autism community - I think - so someone was using that to kind of create bonds with other people in that same community. Yes, I saw community ones. I can't think of any geographical regional ones. 
FLOOR:  I recently okay across an effort to create a more mutant standard, that Unicode is almost moving too slowly and not being inclusive enough to the inclusion of language, and there are things like emojis in ... how does that tension work, do you think, between the very specification-orientated approach of Unicode or the natural evolution of language? 
>> I don't know. That's really interesting. I would love to talk to you about that afterwards if we may. I think probably the beauty of this is that it shows that we can still evolving and take ownership of the pictographs and the characters we are given and allowed to use in digital communication. I think this is good to show we are still doing this. With emoticons, we were given these punctuation points that we were told to tell you when to pause in a sentence, or when you were able to conjoin sentences, or finish this thought. We thought no, that's a smiley face. I think it is quite nice that we are able to fight against that constriction, not fully constraining people leads to more creativity often. So, sorry, I've waffled here. I would love to think about it. I would love to talk to you more afterwards. I think basically, what I'm saying is we're creative, it doesn't matter how you constrain us, we will always represent what we want to say. 
FLOOR:  I'm interested a little bit in your ways of data for these. A lot of manufacturers will go to lots of effort to keyboard information in order to give their - better swiping use age ... data for this ... . 
>> Are you asking we would able to skim emoji use data? 
FLOOR:  Exactly. 
>> That's a really good question. This isn't what I did. It was qualitative and required people to reflect on the emojis. There are a load of really fantastic ... who have had had access to data sets of millions of uses of emoji, and I would recommend that you go to other experts who have done that type of research because it is fascinating when you do have a lot of data. Are you aware of any use of emoji of people who use screenreaders, where the image is not going to come across and it says "peach"? 
>> Yes, I don't have an experience of using screenreaders with emoji, and I imagine it's an unfulfilling use case. I don't know how many - I don't have any research about that, but that's a fascinating question, actually. Thank you for pointing that out to me. Sorry, I can't give you anything more useful. One more question if anyone has one? One more down here. Cool. Also, I have a collection of emoji down here, if anyone brought any to add to my collection. Making models. 
FLOOR:  One of the things I've noticed is different devices can sometimes render emojis slightly differently, being that I think it is a grimacy smile on an Apple phone, no, it's a smile on an Apple phone and - I've got majorly confused having a conversation. Is there any standardisation coming? 
>> Not that I'm aware of, and I think that's similar to that question. I think it might be a good thing there's not standardisation. I think it adds excitement and intrigue into things, but there are lots of lovely Twitter stories of celebrities using that face reporting on stories they thought were tense and touching, and for a lot of people, it looked like they were reporting on a First Minister story with a big smiley face to it. It is amusing sometimes when they are misused. 
FLOOR:  What's your opinion of the Emoji Movie? 
>> It's very rare for research that I do to be of any interest or relevance to the blockbuster movie industry, so I'm happy it exists and happy that I haven't seen it, nor will I ever! Thank you. [Applause].