>> On making, understanding, and appreciating cider. Thank you very much!

JENNY: Hello, everybody! And thank you very much for all turning up today, so early on in the camp, and I hope you have a wonderful camp. Okay. I'm Jenny List. Some of you may know me because I write for Hacker Day and Hackspace Magazine. This is a slightly older version of the presentation, so it's got OxHack and Hacker Day.com. I'm also a member of Milton Keynes Maker Day. So without further ado... Okay. Making a quality cider is simple. You just take some apple juice and wait. Which is not far from the truth! You press apples in about September, October, and leave it over winter, somewhere quiet, and the next year you have cider. Obviously there's a bit more than that, which I'll go into, but that's where I always start with this talk.

This is based on my background. I'm an electronic engineer and technical journalist, but I grew up on a small farm in Oxfordshire, and my parents tried to do the self-sufficiency thing in the 1970s and planted a large orchard which had all sorts of apple trees, and of course by the 1980s and 1990s it had far too many apples, far more apples than any normal Oxfordshire family could eat in ten years. So I ended up with all these apples to play with. My parents were great. I realized afterwards this was them introducing me to alcohol. Other people, it's behind the bike sheds with vodka or Coke or something. With me, they reckoned the safest thing to do was: If I could make it, I could drink it!

So there was almost nothing that grows in North Oxfordshire that I haven't tried to make alcohol out of.

(laughter)

But we're talking about apples today, anyway. The traditional cider making process. This is probably universal to most cider making regions of the world. In the UK, it's mostly the West of England. Where we are now. Sort of a belt from here, bit of Wales, down through Somerset, into the West Country. But it's actually across a lot of the country. You'll find Eastern Counties ciders. There's a bit of cider made in my half of the world commercially. I'm not a commercial producer. There's a bit of cider made. You'll find it across most of the southern half of the UK than here. You'll find it in Normandy, in the North of Spain. They each have their own individual and distinct cider styles, which I'll talk about a bit later. Anyway, apples. Obviously they grow over summer.

My apple growing year begins around Christmas. I prune apple trees. Ours is a traditional sort of eating apple orchard, so the trees need to be kept in check. So you're cutting off stray branches and stuff like that. And this is while there's frost on the ground, around Christmas. The leaves come out around April, May. Blossom time in May, small fruits forming June, July, August. In late September, early October, I'm harvesting apples and I'm pressing them to make the juice. That's in October. Then as I said earlier, they sit there, they ferment, the yeast does its job over winter. With beers, some beers, particularly ales, with higher temperature yeast, they will ferment quite quickly, at a high temperature. You have to heat them. With ciders, the slower the better. And the colder the better. You leave them over winter... I mean, real cider makers will often leave them out in a barn. I've heard tales of big vats of apple juice fermenting and having ice on the top from the frost, for instance. You leave it to ferment slowly. All over winter. Because the flavors, the complex flavors, come from the slow fermentation. If you have a very fast fermentation, then you might not have as technically good a cider. It will be a good cider, but it won't have some of the extra sort of flavor kind of notes.

In March, you rack the cider. What's happened by then is the fermentation is mostly completed. The yeast has died off. Because the alcohol has gotten to the point where it can't do any more work, it's encysted. So at the bottom you've got a thick layer of dead yeast. You don't want that yeast getting in your cider because it ruins the flavor and it's the stuff that gives you headaches. If you ever had bad cider, it probably had yeast floating in it. It's cloudy. So you rack it. Very carefully, in my case, you siphon off the cider and leave behind the yeast, throw away the yeast, and wind up with a load of clear cider. Then you end up with your clear cider sitting there for a few more months, 'til sort of May, June, when any yeast that's still in suspension has settled out, and then you bottle it. You bottle it in May. Traditionally, on sort of West Country farms, they say that you would give last year's cider to the workers at harvest time.

So, for instance, you would give them August-September. So you give it a few months' maturing in the old stone flagons or whatever. But in terms of my cider, I would mature it six months to a year. I would usually crack open my first cider at Christmas. So it would be a year and a month or two old at that point. Though I find with my cider it just gets better and better the longer you leave it. It's like a fine wine. And I've got ciders that are... About 10, 15 years old. And you open a bottle -- I rarely open a bottle of the oldest ones. I haven't got many left. But it's still good and it's still really nice. It's just got better with age. Anyway, the most important thing that tells you what cider you're gonna have comes from the apples that you choose. And there are basically three types of flavor note in cider apples. There's acid, which as you probably guess is the sour taste. There's sugar -- yet again, the sweet taste. You're probably used to both of these from the apples that you'll buy in the supermarket. So a cooking apple will have a load of acid in it. If you pick a crabapple from the hedge, it's probably mouth-puckeringly sour. That's the acid. And sugar, yeah. If you've ever eaten a Golden Delicious or something like that, that's full-on sugar. Lovely and sweet. Now, tannin, if you're used to West Country ciders, you'll know the tannin flavor. It's that sort of dryness on the tongue flavor. If you ever picked a sloe off the hedge in autumn, that's the same tannin. I believe there are tannins in stewed tea as well. But it's a kind of a different flavor.

But the tannin is what gives West Country ciders their flavor. Not all ciders have tannin. West Country ciders traditionally have tannin. But certainly most British ciders, unless they're specifically not a tannin kind of cider, will endeavor to have some tannin, some tannin apples in there. Generally they're more tannic this side of the country. And Eastern County ciders are less tannic. If you get a cider like Aspall's, for instance, which you can buy in supermarkets, it's a mass market cider, from Suffolk, and has almost no cider at all. I notice someone has a Weston's flagon here. If you eat Weston's and compare it with Aspall's, you'll instantly see the difference between tannin and no tannin. It's just the style of the region. Ciders don't have to have tannic apples. You can make it with any apples. It just tells what kind of thing comes out.

Now, if you look at apples, you can represent any given apple on this triangle. Each of your different types of flavor on different corners of the triangle. You can say this has got so much sugar, so much tannin, so much acid, and put it anywhere on this triangle. On the top, for instance, for sweet, I've got Golden Delicious. Personally I find it a very insipid apple. It's a dessert apple. It's just sweet, just mush. I'm not a great fan of Golden Delicious, but it is very sweet. You're probably all familiar with Cox's Orange Pippin. For people who aren't British, I don't know how far it's gone beyond the UK, but it's sort of sweet with a bit of bitter flavor kind of apple, kind of halfway between sweet and sharp. If you're used to British cooking apples -- Bramley's Seedling -- that's quite sour when you taste it. It's got quite a lot of sugar in it. It makes brilliant drinking juice. If you've got a Bramley tree, never make cider with it. Because it's far too sour. Your cider will be unappetizing, but if you've got some, press them. Pasteurize the juice. It makes great drinking juice. Usually the Hedgerow apples are quite sour. Occasionally you'll find one that's tannic or sweet, but it's about 1 in 20.

The ones on the right are all different cider apples, and here's where the magic of the cider maker's craft comes. They want to make the perfect balanced juice with not much acid but a bit of acid for interesting flavor. Enough sugar to have lots and lots of fermentation, but lots of tannin to give that tannic bite to their cider. Dabinett, halfway up the right hand side, that's the classic cider apple. Well-balanced, a mixture of sweet and bitter, tannin. I actually like... I can eat a Dabinett straight off the tree. Some people hate them. I like them. They're sweet and tanninated. It's well-balanced enough that it makes a good single varietal, which is one type of apple. There are other types. Yarlington Mill, Stoke Red are bitter. Crimson King are midway between bitter and tannin. Usually cider makers will blend them together in the press to get the juice they want. If you have apple varieties, see where you can put them, when you taste them, on this triangle. Anyway, move on.

Just take a bit of... Ahhh! All this talking. There are two processes involved. Now, in a minute, I've got videos. I hope the videos work. My apologies if they don't. This is through PowerPoint, not Libre Office. So my apologies if the videos don't work. But the two processes: First of all, you crush the apples to make a sort of porridge-like pulp. If you just press apples as they are, you don't get much juice. You have to open up the apples to let the juice be able to flow out. Traditionally -- this is from Wikipedia -- this is a picture of an apple crusher in Normandy. They don't tend to get used much, but they're symbolic, the millwheel, going around with a horse, crushing, and what should come out of this is a porridge of mashed-up apples. A lot of more commercial people use a rotary scratter, like a massive industrial grater. My scratter, my dad made it for me. It's a stainless steel blade. More of a chopper, but it does the same thing. And pressing, as you might guess -- just squeezes the stuff out of the apples.

The one in the picture is just a straightforward up and down press, where the apple pulp is put in so-called "cheeses". It's wrapped in muslin and has boards between them and a whole load of them are stacked, one on top of the other. The idea is that the boards allow channels for the apple juice to come out. My press is quite a small one, so it's a big round drum. You'll see it on the video if the video works. But either way, you just squeeze the apple pulp, and out comes the juice. Let's see if the video works. First of all, we'll be scratting. And I did it in the dark, as you can see! Okay. My apologies. It seems the video isn't working in PowerPoint. It's just a picture of my scratter, chopping up apples. Apple pulp coming out of the bottom. And similarly, pressing the pulp. Yes, again, doesn't work. A picture of my press. Me going round and round and round. And lots of brown apple juice coming out of the bottom into a stainless steel bowl. Okay?

What do you do when you've got a load of juice? You've got a load of juice. It's straight out of the orchard. I'm afraid apples in the orchard get all sorts of dirt on them. You've got animals and all sorts. I wash my apples, I run them through a big tin bath, but even so, if you drink the apple juice that comes straight out of the press, you'll get a runny tummy. Don't ask me how I know this. I just know this. Okay? I and most commercial cider makers will add a bit of sulfite. It's sodium metabisulfite. It reacts with the acid and makes sulfur dioxide. The sulfur dioxide kills bacteria. Just harmful bugs. It's driven off in the fermentation. So you make a bit of SO2. Then something comes along and blasts loads of CO2 through the cider and the SO2 is gone. If you pick up a bottle of cider and it says: May contain sulfites, if it's been properly fermented, it won't contain any sulfites. They're long gone because the SO2 is blasted off. They have to say it because they added them. It's not much. That's what "may contain sulfites" means. You can use a natural yeast on the apples. It's a bit variable. I cheat slightly. I use a cultured yeast. I think the yeast I use is actually a champagne yeast, because you get a more uniform result.

If you use the natural yeast on the apples, sometimes you get an amazing cider. Sometimes you get an awful cider. I like amazing cider. I also add a nutrient. Now, that's basically a fertilizer. The reason for that is: My parents planted our orchards in the 1970s, and I've tried to put manure on the trees, but the fact is, the trees are a little deficient in nutrients. Now, this comes through in the juice. So the juice hasn't got much nutrients. The yeast is a bit starved. And it starts looking wherever it can. Now, wherever it can means, believe it or not, it picks up sulfurous compounds from the DNA of the apple juice cells. Cells from the apples. And it makes it smell of bad eggs. And when you've thrown away a batch of cider because it stinks of bad eggs, you use yeast nutrient next time. So yes, I cheat slightly with a culture nutrient.

Then you basically stop nasties getting in. I use an airlock with a bit of water. Commercial cider makers wouldn't use an airlock. Too much CO2. They just use a filter to stop particles getting in. There's enough CO2 coming off that it's not gonna allow any bugs back in. And they leave it over winter. I leave it in a cold room. And it just ferments. I'll tell you what I use to ferment in. I use big plastic Jerry cans like caravaners use for water. In the small to medium sized farm cider making industry, they use IBCs, industrial bulk carriers. Great big plastic drums, usually with a metal cage round them. And we come back to what I said earlier about racking. Taking the cider off the dead yeast. Transferring to sterilized bottles. Certainly wash your bottles properly. Sterilize them with Camden tablets if you can. That kills off the bacteria. You don't want to go through all that hard work only to find that the bacteria take your cider away from you or you make vinegar. Vinegar is great, but you don't want vinegar when you make cider. And then you wait! In terms of alcohol by volume, you get... Between 5% and 7%. And that really comes in to how much sugar was in the apples. You can add sugar. You can get above 5% or 7% if you want. You can use a yeast that will take more alcohol. But if you want a real cider, natural cider, you just go with what sugar is in the apples.

In my case, it's usually 5% to 6%, because summers in Oxfordshire never make that much sugar, but that's good enough for me. So... What I've just described is how you make a full juice real cider. Now... I'm gonna talk about the stuff you buy in the supermarket. Now, there's a whole load of different ciders in the supermarket. And they're all pretending to be the Real McCoy, the authentic stuff. Marketing redolent of farrrrm as in ooo-arrr, I'm a soider drinker and all that kind of stuff. And the trouble is... You don't know what you're getting. On this page, you've got a bunch of different brands. Strongbow, Magner's, Weston's, Gwynt y Ddraig, and who knows what you've got, right? And you've also got the word Scrumpy. Great word. I used to work for the Oxford Dictionary for several years. Scrumpy comes from the West Country dialect word, "scrump", withered apple. And it comes from... Ooo-arrr, this be the real stuff. Oh, I've gone into pirate there. You find all sorts of stuff sold as scrump'y. It often doesn't mean anything. It's often a clue that it's the crap they don't drink themselves. It's what they sell to the tourists. I look for real cider. I look for the kind of things I look for, if I'm looking for a fine wine. You want a cider that's enjoyable and lovely to drink. Not something that's sour or a bit off. If someone says... Ooo-arr, that have had rats in it, no mistake... Then walk away. There's a lot of marketing rubbish about cider.

The only one on this page that is actually being absolutely truthful is Stella Artois, in the corner. They write "it's not cider". There are some that I would consider to be real ciders. Henney's, for instance. They're a mass market cider now, but they stay with their roots as farm ciders. Weston's is made from concentrated juice, but it is a proper made from juice cider. Gwynt Y Ddraig... (speaking Welsh) anybody speak Welsh here? Coolest name for a cider ever. It's "Dragon's Breath". It's a fantastic cider. If you can get Gwynt Y Ddraig... The double-D is thh in Welsh... It's a good cider. So we're gonna talk about how the nasty end of the commercial market is made. The Strongbows, White Lightnings, the Blackthorns, and dare I say it, Bulmer's, Stella, and Magner's. Nothing that luminous shade of orange is natural. Sorry, I've probably already covered some of this. Strongbow, Woodpecker, White Lightning. So-called premium ciders. They're basically the same, but in a fancier bottle. Real ciders... And yet again, you see I've named a few. Weston's, Orchard Pig, Henney's, Hogan's, Gwynt y Ddraig. They tend to be slower bottling, made from juice, tend to be a bit more expensive.

And then you get the specialty ciders. Small producer exemption. There's a tax exemption that you can produce cider in this country without having to pay tax to the Revenue. But you have to register with them and you have to make under 70 hectoliters. 70 cubic liters a year. There are a lot of them. Some are god awful we sell scrumpy to the tourists kind of places, and others are the most amazing ciders you'll ever drink. Seek them out. If you're in the West Country, they are worth it. I've mentioned Normandy cider makers. They have an amazing process called keeving, where they kill off the pectin so it stops fermentation before all the sugar is used. You make a naturally sparkling cider that is also naturally sweet. All the other ciders, if they're sweet, they've had sweetener added. So anyway, you want to break into the commercial cider business, you want to make Magner's or White Lightning or something like that.

You start with imported apple juice. I've put China there. China exports millions of liters. Loads and loads of container tanks will come on a ship. Job done. You need some sugar. There isn't enough sugar in the concentrated apple juice. Hydrolyzed wheat starch! Yet again, bulk carrier from China. You take a yeast culture. You don't take the same yeast culture I use. No, you use a yeast culture that's been engineered to ferment up to 20 or 30% alcohol. You want something really strong. And you put it into a fermentation plant. That's a factory. And you end up with a cider. It's over 20% alcohol. You wouldn't drink it. You want to sell it at 4% or 5%. So you dilute it with water. But it isn't sweet enough. And it needs to be fizzy. Because the customers expect fizziness. And also it probably comes out looking a little dull, so make it nice and glowing orange. So you add lots of chemicals. So you'll add something like CO2 to make it fizzy, color, probably ammonia, caramel, that's burnt hydrocarbons. Not burnt sugar. And sweeteners. That's probably sucralose nowadays, because it tastes a bit like sugar. And you end up with a bottle of 5% alcohol, sweet sparkling cider, that is actually less than 30% apple juice.

Welcome to Magner's Country. Ha-ha. I hope I've given you a good impression of the kind of things to look out for in cider. And to find good ciders. We are in cider country here! I suggest if you're interested, have a Google. Look for local cider farms or local cider mills. You're about the time of year where cider farms are starting to sell their stuff. I'm afraid I'm a bit... I should have done some research. I don't quite know the local ones in this part of the world. They will be there. It will be interesting to have a look. And take a while during the camp and drive out and find some. They will sell you some on the farm. More information. I will point you at Andrew Lea. Andrew Lea is retired now. He's a cider scientist. He used to work at -- when the government had a cider industry research laboratory, he was one of their scientists. What he doesn't know about cider isn't worth knowing. He's published a book. Get his book. His book is great. I've got his book. It taught me a lot about cider, and I had already made cider for quite a few years, when I'd got it. And Cider Workshop is an online mailing list. You'll find people like me who do it as amateurs and you'll find professional cider makers. They're all knowledgeable and enthusiastic about cider, and they will help anybody at any level. Enjoy your cider! I should say Wassail! Enjoy your cider. It's good stuff. Thank you very much!

(applause)

Do we have time for questions or not? Is Dominik here? Okay. I can take questions as he's setting up. Does anybody have any questions?

>> How do you make a naturally sweet cider and stop it fermenting dry and strong?

JENNY: Okay. We've touching on the keeving, the technique that Normandy cider makers use. They traditionally used a bacterial culture which would precipitate out the pectin. Pectin is the stuff that makes jam into jelly. They would precipitate out the pectin, and the pectin was the food the yeast needs to ferment. So with no pectin to live off, the yeast would then stop fermenting, and would leave some sugar behind. Nowadays, you can actually buy the enzyme that the bacteria makes, as a powder, and just add it. Keeving is notoriously difficult. I have never done it. I know plenty of people who have tried and failed horribly. I know one or two people who have keeved beautiful ciders. I've drunk beautiful Normandy ciders. If you go to Normandy, have some of the local cider. It's amazing.

>> Is there anything useful you can do, such as forms of cooking, with the pulp, once you've got the juice out of it?

JENNY: Bloody good question. Yeah. You probably could make apple pie, particularly if your pressing isn't very good. I mean, to be honest, my press isn't very efficient. So yes, you probably could. I have to say... I compost it. So I'm probably not the person to ask. We've got one more. Oh, God, there's several. Try to get a couple over there. Lady over there too.

>> So can I taste your cider?

(laughter)

JENNY: Oive spaaat in this point! Find me in the Hacker Day village. I've got some more. Not all of you. I haven't got that much.

>> Is there any good cider here on EMF Camp? In the bar?

JENNY: Yes, there is. I haven't seen what it is. Always look on a bar not for a pump or a fizzy gas pump. Look for a bag-in-box. Literally a plastic bag in a box full of cider. That's normally from a local producer or similar. Because it doesn't keep that well. It's normally got a 30-day shelf life, so if you see one of those, it ain't been there for long. Awesome. This man has a list of local ciders. So I did notice some bag-in-boxes on the bar. So go and try them. I don't know what they are, because I haven't had time.

>> Today at 10:00 in the evening, it's next to the hardware hacking area, there will be a cider tasting. There are still some spots. So if you check...

(music)


