>> Welcome to stage C. Our next talk is taking the Mini.Mu with Helen Leigh.

HELEN: Hello, everyone. We're having a good time? Obviously we are. We're all nerds at EMF. So in the grand tradition of my EMF talks, nothing worked by an hour ago, and I arrived here with basically nothing. So we're gonna go on a little journey of how I made a ridiculous instrument as a prototype, and how it's actually become a real thing that you can buy in a real shop. And I'm gonna tell you about some of my ridiculous music things that I've done with it, and with lots of other people as well. And hopefully get you to use this in your classrooms. Use this at home. It's super easy and super cheap. I've tried to make it as simple as possible. So anyway... Onwards. This is the Mini.Mu. And this is prototype two of the Mini.Mu. It's a gesture controlled musical that uses chiptune... I'll play some of that for you in a minute. But I designed this for kids to be able to make gesture-controlled instruments.

But more than just playing an instrument, I wanted them to be able to make an instrument. So they actually sew the whole thing. They wire it. They code it. And then they make the music and perform it themselves. It's super easy. But it's just a starting point. So I'm hoping to inspire lots of kids to just play around and have fun with technology. So I don't know why that just went forward without me touching anything, but never mind. So as you know, I'm Helen. I made the Mini.Mu. I'm a maker, I'm a writer, I do some education stuff. I live in Berlin and sometimes London. And I like making musical instruments. I think it's a really enjoyable experience. I would call myself a fairly shitty musician. I play probably 20 different instruments. All of them extremely badly. And that's one of the reasons why I love making my own instruments, because I'm the best in the world at playing the things that I made myself.

So this is a story about how I made this. Okay, right. So... It's inspired by an amazing musical instrument called the MI.MU glove. Can I just get a quick hands up? Who has heard of the MI.MU glove? Quite a lot of you. Okay, cool. So as it says on the screen, the MI.MU is a very fancypants MIDI controller. That's a bit jargony, and I like to avoid jargon, but really MIDI is just a way of making music with a computer. Okay? So when we make music with our mouths or with a traditional instrument, we've got lots of wobbly lines that come out of our mouths, like sine waves. But in a computer, they use something called MIDI, which is basically up and downy instead of wiggly. And the MI.MU is a wonderful instrument that was designed, thought of many years ago, by a musician called Imogen Heap. And she can do these amazing things with it.

Really kind of... So she's really passionate about electronic music. And expressive instrumentation of electronic music. And she kind of was sat behind her desk, making these beautiful concoctions. And then when she went out into the world, to try and perform these things that she made, she felt like there was this complete disconnect from her audience. She was unable to perform in the way that you might perform with a guitar or a flute. You're just standing behind your computer, and even though electronic music is very exciting, actually visually, for it to be performed, is actually kind of dull. So she decided around ten years ago to make electronic music performance expressive again.

Now, the thing about being ahead of your time is that sometimes some of your ideas are a little bit impractical. So her MI.MU glove is amazing, and it's been on tour with some incredible big names. Including Ariana Grande. I brought a short clip of her using one later. But it's not quite come to market yet, because it's expensive. It's complicated. It has to work in these multi-date, multi-arena festival situations. So the technology is super complex. This is what it is. Okay? It's got all these different really cool sensors. It's got bend sensors, flex sensors, it's got visual feedback, it's got haptic feedback, which means it does nice buzzy things when you do things. It's been really designed by musicians for musicians. Really cool. Really nice to wear.

I've had a play on them. Really amazing piece of kit. So yeah, I talked about her. She is quite famous and she does cool things. So why did I start doing this? I kind of came across, through my music technology work, we kind of crossed paths through Terry, who is actually out there. And I said... Do you know what? This glove is super inspiring. I can see this working super well to inspire kids into technology. I mean, if you know me, you'll know that I'm a big advocate for creative technology and for the power of creative technology in classrooms, in homes, and just generally for fun. I think we sometimes overstate how much worthiness there is to technology. Sometimes it's all right to just mess around with it and have a nice time. Gesture control is really one of the things I particularly like doing. I find it expressive, I find it really enjoyable. And yeah. That says it all, really. It's fun and I like it.

And I was doing quite a lot of work with gesture control. This is a picture I did with one of my friends. We did a hack together. Her name is Coco Sato. She does amazing origami, and she did a flirting device based on Japanese fan technology. It was a really cool hack. And I started thinking more and more in my own personal work about gesture control and non-verbal signaling and how cool it was and how I wanted to do more stuff in the classroom with. Another reason I really liked Imogen's work and wanted to do more with it is that I know from experience that teaching in a classroom is more effective if you're giving them something that's real. If you're giving them something meaty to chew on. And you can be like... Look at this cool thing that someone is actually doing with this technology, and now we can do something like it!

It's really inspiring to kids, especially the kids that don't really necessarily see the point of the technology for its own sake. So having real world tech that's linked to actual jobs, actual outcomes, or joy, is a really wonderful way, in my eyes, and in my experience, of democratizing technology. So... Oh, yes. This is the glove in action. I feel like I've talked a lot about something that you haven't actually seen. This is Ariana Grande, as I'm sure the younger ones of you will know, using the glove.

(electronically modulated multivoice choir synth controlled by gloves)

(synth looping, Ariana Grande improvising over the loop)

(pulse dropping in pitch and rising again)

(crowd cheering)

HELEN: Uh-oh. I did that wrong. So based on that, I started coming up with the idea of a glove that's inspired by Imogen's work and inspired by the work that's been done by her team on this. And I came up with the idea of doing a really stripped-down version of this. Something I love doing with technology is ripping stuff out of it and trying to make it the simplest thing it possibly can be, and also make it the cheapest it possibly can be as well, because I know teachers have got no money. So I approached Imogen through a mutual friend and said: Hey, I've got this idea for a children's glove that's inspired by your glove. I reckon I can do it for less than 50 quid. And I reckon I can do it in a family and teacher-friendly format. Do you want to let me have a go at it? And she went... Well, we've got this event coming up in ten days! Do you fancy having a stab?

And I went... Yeah, all right. And that's what came of it! So this was the first version of the glove. First of all, this is an interlude here. And I'm gonna talk about this. So this is using the BBC MicroBit, which loads of you will already know about. But if you don't, it's a very simple microcontroller, designed specifically for young people. But I've also used it with lots of artists, and people who don't want to become specialists in the way that making your own PCBs or even using Arduino to a certain extent requires you to become. So MicroBit allows you to dabble in electronics, which is one of the reasons I think it's just a lovely platform. Anyway, inside this little microcontroller, which is up here, we've got an accelerometer. It can tell where it is in space. It can tell if it's up, down, if it's being jiggled about. I thought... You know what? That'll do. We don't need flex sensors. We'll just have an accelerometer. And we'll do something with that.

We stripped it right back to that, and MicroBit is a lovely thing. Here we are. In all of my workshops, this is the first piece of code that a child will write. It's just block code. They just drag it across. On shake, start melody. Bada bing. And they upload it, and it does it. It blows their fragile minds. It's very exciting. You don't need to make something complex. Two hours -- I basically have a sit down. I have a cup of tea. They're just off making their own melodies. Off doing different types of things with these things. For someone who's leading a classroom or leading a workshop, you're like... Yep, job is done. That is over! I'm having a cuppa and a sitdown. So this is genuinely how simple it is. And it does blow their little minds. It's kind of amazing.

So yeah, back to the prototype. I would say that even though it was successful, it was a bit bonkers to do something -- take something from a little seed of an idea to an actual prototype that I presented in front of, like, 300 people. In ten days. But, you know... I would do it again. It was great fun. So making the prototype. Here we are. So this is part of the prototype. This is part of the prototyping session for the first ever version of the glove. And there are some kids in the room actually who were also at this prototyping session. And I wanted to talk a little bit about this. So I do quite a lot of developing of stuff for kids, and people are always... And my clients are always like... Really surprised by how much I ask the opinions of the children.

And I think that just makes... You know, this is what I have to say about that. User testing really works. I just wrote a book on DIY electronics for kids. And I didn't choose a single project that went into my books. Children did. Every single project was chosen by kids. And I think it's really important, when you're making something for somebody, just like a glove, anything for a kid, I mean... Ask them. Ask them what they think. I mean, it's not super complicated. I mean, for the first one, I just sat down with five young people. We made different gloves. And rather than just asking them, I watched how they interacted with it. And it gives you an idea of what they find easy, what they find difficult, how long these things take, the kind of level of skills, and then the second version. I did... I think I did... There were 50 girls in the class. And I ran the whole workshop on my own. Which was fine, actually!

But you can really gain a lot from what they tell you. And I always say: Hey, you are my users. I'm prototyping. Can you give me all your feedback? And it makes them feel super important and super special. So if there's anyone out there who does do a lot of work with kids, please do involve them in the decision making. I think it's a really good thing to do, and it gives them joy and it gives them confidence and it means that you actually make something better at the end of it. So... What else? This is from the second prototyping session that was absolutely delightful. We had a lot of musicians in this one. People making the Harry Potter tune. We had lots of kids... You know what? I haven't played one yet. That's pretty remiss of me, isn't it? I think I should do that. Would you like to hear one? So this is, I would say... The one just before we go to press. This is the almost final version.

You can come have a look at it at the front afterwards. The crocodile clips will be a bit shorter. So it's really simple. Basically the kids... They have a felt thing here, which has got different sized hands on it. They cut it out. They sew it. Pretty simple. You would think. But actually that's the hardest bit. That takes, like, an hour. Everything else takes like half an hour. Then they wire it up. Three crocodile clips. It's very simple. But it's age-appropriate. It has power and grand. You're talking a little bit about circuits. And then they actually code it. Let me play this. So this is code that was written by an 11-year-old girl. And I'll see if you recognize it. There's quite a lot of old people in here, so maybe you won't. So I think this is a really good example of how gesture-based -- and this was actually done not just as a song but as a choreography. She had this little dance that went along with it. Anyway, here we go. Of course it's not working.

I'm gonna have to reupload the code. Oh, no, I don't have any USB cable with me. This is very terrible. I don't know why that's not working. Um... Yeah. It's EMF! I know. Nothing works at EMF. It's probably just got damp or something. It was working about ten seconds... It's not that kind of USB cable. I know! I know! It's micro-USB to USB. Yeah. Oh, EMF, I love you. There's literally no reason. Okay. Where is my code? All right. A little bit of live coding here. Okay. Doot doot doot doo... Oh, no, it's not gonna be a surprise now. You're gonna be able to see what it is. I'm tricking you. Here we go. All right. One second. Talk amongst yourselves. It works!

(applause)

This is why I love EMF. I could never get away with this shit anywhere else. So here we have the world premiere, coded by an 11-year-old girl. Oh, dear. Let's see if this works. Oh, come on!! Come on!! Legitimately! You just heard that, though, right? What the... Seriously! There's no reason for it not to work. I've spent too long doing this. It was the batteries!!

(chiptune bleeping)

Who recognizes that? Nobody? You're too old. How about this one?

(chiptune bleeping)

(captioner is definitely too old)

All right. So these were all coded individually. I can show you this code as well. But... Shhhhhhh... You had your time! You wasted it! You're not getting any more of my attention. All right! So... Oh, let's put the presentation back up! Come on! Here we go. Let's put that up over there. Ehh-eh-ehhhh... There we go. That'll do. Yeah. Okay. So... The kind of things that kids were doing were amazing. They were doing really cool songs, really amazing sound effect gloves. Finn over there did one of my favorite ones. There's an effect on MicroBits which is free fall. If you are free falling, it can detect it. And he was like... Do you think that if it fell off a building that it would be able to know? And I was like... Yes, I think it would. And then this smile spread across his face, and off he scurries to his computer, and suddenly comes back with this glove that, when you drop it, or it falls off a building, it plays you the funeral march back! Nice! Good job, Finn. One of my favorites. Good job, Finn.

All right. So... The next thing that we did... After doing all these amazing user testing and having a really nice time in classrooms across the country... Is that we ended up having a chat with the lovely Paul from Pimoroni. And that's basically -- working with them has been like... Hearteyes emoji. Just down the board. And they really liked the concept. Obviously it's really easy to manufacture. I mean, it's largely some felt, we've got a lovely PCB that we made, which is the world's first sewable speaker. OoooOOOooooOOh. And it comes with everything included. Needle and thread and all these bits and bobs. It's gonna be in a really nice shiny box and all that kind of stuff. So I mean... This is the first time I've had a proper kit. I've done my own stuff before.

Kind of more DIY-style. Kind of making everything myself on laser cutters and 3D printers. I had my first small successful hit, which was a robot unicorn, about a year ago. Had a modest number of orders. And suddenly thought... Oh my God, this is terrible. Why on earth would I want to be a manufacturer? I hate this! This is... So at that point I decided... Right, okay. The next time I do a project, I really want to do it with somebody who knows what they're doing. Because I didn't! And going through that experience, as someone who has primarily been a bedroom maker and a hackspace maker and actually going to a small company, but a company that really knows what they're doing, has been really exciting for me. I got to press go on a pick and place machine, which was... Box ticked! Loved that. But yeah, Pimoroni have been amazing. We're gonna have this box come out as a kit I think in October. We hope.

It'll be out. But we're gonna sell it for 39 quid, which I think is pretty good for everything that's included. But it's been my first thing that I've done, taking it from a make to an actual product. And it's been really eye-opening, understanding all of the different things that could possibly go wrongs. Although it's been buffered somewhat by working with Pimoroni. And so... I was gonna make some music, but I did just wipe the code on the thing that makes this go. So you're just gonna have to pretend. And it was working in the field over there! So you're just gonna have to pretend that my robot arm is doing... Is controlling these robot arms. So you can't really see, because it's quite dark, but you can come up and have a look. But I have got three robotic arms, solenoids, like push-pull things. Attached to some levers that hit a really cool xylophone that I've had since I was really young. So let's mute that one. Let's play that and see what happens.

(xylophone playing)

You can do that with a gesture. I really wanted to show you these things as well. It's not just about controlling a computer. It's not just about making chiptune music. This actually feeds into a wider ecosystem. So the MicroBit -- a 13 quid computer -- can control a really expensive, really professional piece of music software. This is going through Ableton Live. It can also control Garage Band seamlessly. It can control your iPad. It can control actual physical instruments that use MIDI as well. And if I hadn't wiped the code that we had worked so hard on, it can control a loop of my voice as well. So I can actually sing. It can control it. It can do delay, it can do reverb. Just from two buttons and an X, Y axis. There's so much more in from. There's a magnetometer in there that you can do really cool things with. You can have directional-based sound that you can explore. And... Eh-eh-eh, that's enough of that. Thank you very much.

And also I want to show you this cool thing that I made with my friend Tom. Oh, no. Which is here. So this is, again, this is just using two MicroBits. See if it works. Two MicroBits and some copper piping. This is the gesture control there. So it's basically angles. I wrote some code so that the angles control the different notes that are being played on this copper pipe instrument, that's just being hit with solenoids. Again, it's really fun. We should play that again from the beginning. So here we are. This is radio signaling. Different angles, down to this other MicroBit, which is then sending that data via serial to a free Open Source piece of music technology. Which is super cool! So yeah! I think that is exactly my time up. But... I think if anybody has any questions, wants to come and have a look at my little robot arm, or actually wants to come up here and see my annoying... This never doesn't work. Like, it always works! But... Yeah.

Yeah. Come up and say hi. That was half an hour, apparently. Thank you!

(applause)

Thank you. And I will hang around here. So come and say hi, and ask me anything.

