      Falling Faster Straight Down, or How Taking 3D Printing to New Heights
      
      Mike CurtisRouse

      >> Has jumped out at all.  Anyone in this room like to jump out of planes?  Anyone else in the room who likes falling?  Doesn't mean off of buildings, but falling when drunk in the pub, out of bed.  It's bad, it's not generally good for the body or for your life span over a certain height.  Falling out of planes is pretty exciting when you have a power chute.  Sometimes people want you to fall faster.  Anyone know what terminal velocity is.  Maximum speed of the body straight down.  Give me an answer.  Up front.
      AUDIENCE: [ Away from microphone ]
      MIKE: Closer to kilometers.  Little guy the at back.  Bit lower.  Anyone else?  Answers.  140, close.  Pretty close.  About 122, 123.  Irrespective of how big you are, how long, how tall.  A little bit affected by what you're wearing.  But fundamentally you can't fall faster than about 120 miles an hour.  However, 120 miles an hour going into anything, water or concrete or anything, et cetera, is probably going to kill you.  If it doesn't kill you, it's going to hurt.
      Sometimes you want to fall faster.  And generally, people who want to fall faster have been committed or they're TV presenters.  In this case, it's TV presenters.  Last year I was approached by the BBC to ask if I could use my skill D I should caveat that, I'm a rocket propulsion engineer in my day job and 3D printing in my other time.  We have a TV presenter, we want him to fall as fast as a peregrine falcon.  Diving at about 270 miles an hour.  It's beyond bionic.  The guy is not dead, fortunately, Andy Torbet, exbomb disposal, a bit mad, likes to climb mountains and jump out of planes.  They wanted him to exceed 240 miles an hour and the crucial thing, be alive when we got to the bottom.  Important from an insurance perspective.
      And the way they wanted to do this, they work odd what they wanted.  They wanted a pair of big rocket engines.  Not because they were the right thing to use, but they look cool and they'll be great on TV.  Great.  They've basically asked me, get a pair of rocket engines, jet turbines, attach them to him.  Yes, probably.  Do you want him alive at the bottom?  Oh, absolutely.  He needs to survive.  Good for Andy and his family, and probably good for the insurance company.
      But the challenges of trying to do that is really hard.  If you can probably tell, I'm wearing [captioner lost audio] 
      I'm standing like that on one leg.  In reality, the insurance company said, it's a nice idea, but you want to attach a gas turbine into a guy out of a plane and make it into a complicated maneuver.  And we said, yeah, it probably will do, my maybe not every time.  That was not good enough for the insurance company.  That didn't work.  We went on to a different system, which was this wonderful bad boy.  This is in essence the inglorious way of making something.  This is very heavy.  I'm going to pass it around.  This system is basically mounted on your thigh.  It's a better place than your foot.  The problem on your foot, you have the leg back, and the engine running really fast, you basically melt your feet.  And that's, again, bad.  This system was designed to basically attach to your leg in such a way that you could then pull one of the complicated pins which is attached and the whole thing will push away.  And the other caveat I have to throw in there, you can't just ditch the engine.  If it's 23 kilos plus ignition circuitry at 12,000 feet, unless you do something with the engine, it's going to hit the ground.  The chances of hitting someone are slim.  You can't take that into account, so you have to have a power chute incorporated as well, further complicating the design.  And you can probably tell going down the line, the guy jumping out of the plane has a really heavy thing attached to his waist.  It's also a jet engine, it's hot, has to be canted away from the body, which is bad.  And becomes more complicated.  And we have counterrotation.  It's effectively the wake out of the engine swirling, and the turbines are in one direction.
      You can have a counterrotation of two engines with this wake of hot air coming out from behind you which effectively twists you.  You're not only going straight down, you're spinning in a circle.  And if you have the power chute and the engines, the probability of the power chute not getting wrapped around you or something else is pretty slim.  That's pretty bad.
      The biggest problem is basically the pilot said no.  Unsurprisingly.  If I approached you and said, hey, Mr. Pilot, we want to start two jet turbines in an aircraft which is inherently flammable at 15,000 feet with a lot more flammable things on board and a bunch of TV presenters and hang out so he's sitting literally over the  over the platform of the exit where you exit literally like this, while I'm hanging down trying to turn the engines on.  You don't start up instantaneously.  Can you see anything going on with this?  The pilot said no, not in my aircraft.  Do something else.
      And that blew that up, and the insurance company going, you want to jump out with the jet engines.  Is this to fly going faster.  No, to go fast going down.  Can you say that?  Going down.  Can you pass us to a colleague of ours?  Okay.  Now that lesson over.  Don't talk to insurance companies about strapping engines to yourself.  At least if you want to go up.  So, we then basically got the 3D printing.  So, the thing you're passing around currently, really, really heavy.  This, on the other hand, really, really light.  This is actually printed on an automated two.  Small platform, many of you have this, easy to utilize.  It's printed in nylon, it's lightweight, really strong.  However, not for a turbine.  They get hot.  This is for a fan.  Show of hands, anyone doesn't know what an electric ducted fan is?  Anyone know what a Dyson vacuum is?  It's how it works.  High speed motor in the shroud.  The exit velocity of the air coming out is in the hundreds if not thousands of kilometers an hour.  It's effectively a lower thrust, a static thrust.  But give use effectually enough thrust to give you the lift that you need or the downward force that you want.  So, you can put something like that into an engine.
      Lawrence, could you come up here, please.  Well, actually, just walk to the front.  That's probably a safer place for everybody.  Go that way.  Did you want to stand on the speaker?  Yeah, you can stand on the speaker.  This might be interesting.  So, Lawrence has very kindly volunteered to demonstrate the system that we decided to use.  So, while he does look a little bit like the wizard of Oz, I can assure, he's not.  What we fundamentally have is a pair of electric ducted fans on either side held with 3D printed holders, incorporating everything.  Nice, elegant design, as much as you can.  On each side, you have a pair of batteries.  Just around here, if you can see, there's an electric speed controller controlling the power out of the pair of lithium ion batteries.  And they run to the ducted fans.  They have about 13KGs of static thrust each.  They're not off the shelf.  I borrowed them from an exdefense project.  And they won't know, that's fine.
      This is perfectly safe.  And this basically is linked to this really complicated harness and this grab handle here.  Don't pull the grab handle, Lawrence.  Definitely don't.  If he pulls that, these black cables if you can see, do come up afterwards and have a look, they get pulled out and the straps release and you can dump the engine.  And the key thing is you can have very loosely with the trouser legs.  If you need to dump them, pulls the handle, engine is away, they're ripped out.  And the power suit supply.  And the engines drop.  The worse that will happen is you will get something equivalent to a conk or hit on the head.  It's going to hit a bit more, but not going to kill you.  These are powerful.  And if you give me a second, I will demonstrate how powerful they are.  Lawrence might fly.  Anyone lighter in the audience, you might fly, but my insurance doesn't cover that.
      This is usually the bit where everything goes wrong.  Software is involved.  Software generally demonstrates things don't work very well.  That's interesting.  Hold that.  Don't let that get sucked into  now, Lawrence has the control box.  The way we did this actually in flight was with a presser switch which the pilot held in his mouth, the TV presenter, so when he bit down out of fear or happiness, the engine sped up.  The first time I learned this is that TV presenters cannot be trusted.  You cannot tell them don't put your fingers in the pointy holes in the top.  We lost one engine and almost lost the TV presenter before we had fog guards to stick his fingers down here.  That was bad.
      And the other one was don't start in the aircraft.  We learned the hard way, and the pilot learned the hard way that TV presenters don't know how not to press buttons.  I had a presser switch that I had, a dead man's switch, only after he exited the aircraft could we make it live.  He was like a kid in a toy shop.  No, Andy, I told you.  Don't press the button.  Anyway.  That was quite interesting.  Lawrence, I'm going back away from you.  Not that I don't trust you or anything.  Your glasses are on, excellent.  I'm going to put my glasses on for safety.  Safety is really important.  No one is at the front.  He's not going to fly.  It's just very loud.  Over to you, Lawrence.
      [engine starting]
      That's good, Lawrence!  So, as you can see, they're kind of loud, so I probably should have given Lawrence ear defense.  He'll be fine.  You will be fine as well, please, no one to sue me.  But the thrust is really significant.  A smaller member of the audience, if perhaps somewhere between 2025 kilos, you would feel that thrust pushing you up and generating a lift force.  The reality is, if we turned Lawrence upside down, and if you want to help me hold him afterwards, we can show how fast he's falling to the floor.  I'm pretty much running out of time.  But one of the things, Lawrence, you just stay there, Lawrence, it's easiest.  I've just passed a couple of comments in terms of jet packs.  I'm sure some of you in the audience think, hey, this is easy.  I can fly.  You probably can fly.  It's effectively battery weight and the system weight versus the thrust.  I've played around.  And if you get about ten of these borrowed from folks, you can lift yourself.  But only for about five feet from the ground for about 30 seconds.  You can do more interesting stuff as battery chemistry changes.  And the flip side, you can attach a bunch of jet packs and my friend, Rich Browning is doing that.  Rocket man on YouTube, you'll see him flying around.  The interesting thing is he's using powerful engines and there's a lot of thought and design going into how he's utilizing them.  Hey, I will get gas turbines and attach to myself, I will stick with ducted fans.  They don't explode when it goes wrong.  And they suck it in and go into the top here and you have a spanning hand grenade.
      And they go off like a bomb.  Not only do you destroy an expensive engine, you simultaneously blow your leg off as well probably.  That's it for me.  Happy to take any questions subject to available time.  I'm told I do.  And look at Lawrence.  We won't power it up while people are close to full speed.  I don't want to damage your hearing or see any of your digits get sucked into the top.  Thank you very much.
      [ Applause ]
      >> So, any questions, just ask if you can wait for the microphone so everyone can hear.
      AUDIENCE: Hi, if Lawrence lay on a skateboard and you turned the fans on, what would happen?
      MIKE: We would have a really exciting episode of hackie racers I think.  Anyone got a skateboard?  Very happy to try that.
      AUDIENCE: Did you measure what terminal velocity you managed to achieve?
      MIKE: Absolutely.  Light with the details.  Andy was down to 247 miles an hour straight down.  And he did manage to pull his power chute and walked away.  His comments, that was so much fun, can we do it again?  Yes, just as long as I'm not involved.
      AUDIENCE: How much faster do you reckon it would be if you would have been able to use the gaspowered rockets rather than the fans?
      MIKE: The gas turbines had 28 as opposed to 13.  I think 280 or 290.  If you get a speed sky diver where they can get up to 260, 270.  With a little bit of tuning and the engines, get to the 300 mile an hour mark.  But we have to engineer his upper body to handle that velocity.  That would be great, I just don't want to possibly be involved.
      >> Any other questions?
      AUDIENCE: Yeah, I was wondering about that.  Surely at 270 miles an hour the air pressure being pushed on to his head, going straight down, it's quite pleasant.  Like any small deviation in his neck would put an awful lot of strain on his spine.
      MIKE: He's got a big neck.  ExArmy, he's strong.  Yes, it does.  But they tend to dive not at a vertical dive.  It's a slight angle.  The major challenge is actually trying to keep your orientation in freefall.  You go at a slight angle and it's easier to correct that, particularly with counterrotation.  That reduces the pressure.  Absolutely.  And the faster you go, the greater the strain placed on the head and the spine.  So, if you wanted to get up to really fast.  I would love to get him up to the sound barrier.
      AUDIENCE: Fast enough.
      MIKE: We need a composite harness to support his upper body or he would go splat.
      AUDIENCE: Thank you.
      >> That's all the time we have.  So, let's give another round of applause.
      [ Applause ]

