       
      Next up:  From idiot to imposter:  How to get started in a new field
      
      Michael Dales
      
      
      >> Okay, everyone.  There's still time to volunteer.  If you haven't had a go, you can watch the talks right from the front if you become a herald.  Or go to the sound desk and get a wonderful view and experience the fun.  If you want to learn, this is the best place to do.  The next talk, going from idiot to imposter.  Pole was in the way.  Give a big stage B welcome to Michael Dales.
      [ Applause ]
      MICHAEL: Thank you very much.  Okay.  So, this talk  despite the fact I'm here holding a guitar is less about guitars and more about getting started in a new field.  You have come here, seen the hackie racers, seen the people doing the forge work and whatever.  And you look at that and you think, that's awesome.  But there's no way I could do that.  That's wrong, two years ago I hadn't done woodwork since high school.  This guitar I'm holding here I made from scratch.  The idea is anyone can do this.  How do you structure it so that you're likely to succeed and not get frustrated and give up?  That's what the talk is about, and the guitars are an example.  This is guitar zero.  I bought this when I was an undergraduate in 1996.  It was the most expensive guitar I could afford.  I think the cheapest Fender made at the time.  I liked it at the time, but a couple years ago when I was back into playing, it doesn't make the kind of noise.
      Back in university, I wanted to be in Radiohead, and now I want to be in the '60 playing blues.  I didn't match.  And I thought about tweaking it.  But I would probably destroy it and have kindling, and I would be sat.  I left it there.  This is NASA Ames.  I didn't go there for two months; my other half did.  But that left me alone with a lot of spare time.  And I got thinking about what were the problems around, you know, overcoming that reluctance to do the change?  One problem I certainly suffer from is I kind of see polished, finished products as atomic.  I look at them.  If I understand how to do something, I generally think it's easy and trivial, which may not always be true, but that's what I think.  If I see a finished product and don't know how to do it, I can't do it.  And I'm a competent engineer, but when I see a game, I thought I could never do than that's my instinct.
      I spent a lot of time trying to demystify the electric guitar.  I had this finished electric guitar and I wanted to understand how it was put together to get over the initial reluctance to medal with it.  YouTube, if you would to get into it is a fantastic source, I imagine for a lot of topics.  Watch YouTube videos, read Wikis, whatever it is you're interested in, someone will have most likely have written instructions how to get there.
      And the idea is you don't do the instructions right away.  Building a guitar is really hard.  Doing the necks is really quite difficult.  But the idea is you do everything in stage one, but you iterate.  So, this is guitar one.  This is the first guitar I built.  And there's a picture of it.  That's what I wanted.  It was like my other guitar and had a different pickup.  But yeah.  I didn't tackle everything in the first go.
      I cheated.  I bought most of the parts.  And I  you know, kind of assembled it the neck I bought, that's the hard bit.  I actually bought the body.  But I did leave enough to take me out of my comfort zone.  So, the body wasn't quite right.  I would have to do some woodwork to get it into the shape that I wanted.  But a lot of it was done.  Minimize outside of the comfort zone to keep it manageable and everything else I cheated on.  The other problem with the projects, I'm going invest a lot of money, and if I screw it up, I'll be sad because I wasted a lot of money.
      This approach had two benefits.  One I bought the cheapest body possible.  Which is also why it doesn't work.  On the righthand side, there are pentameters that were supposed to be inside.  It was not fit on purpose.  And you could see wood where there shouldn't be wood.  I had to do some work, but because I sent 20quid on this and not 200 or 400, I didn't care if I destroyed it.  I could destroy it ten times and still be okay.
      Yeah.  By doing it incrementally this way, I haven't bought the complicated tools at this point.  If I get halfway through and decide I'm not doing this anymore, I haven't wasted a lot of investment.
      Having got the bits, I then went to my local community workshop.  This is Cambridge Makespace. I imagine in this audience a lot of people are members of hackspaces.  This is just a Cambridgebased workshop where there's lots of people and lots of toys.
      The thing people tend to focus on when you see these, you have a couple of laser cutters, a row of 3D printers, a glass kiln and some screen printing.  But that's only half the kind of goodness of these people.  And it's in the name, community workshop.  The other half is the community.  No one at Cambridge who was building guitars.  I couldn't go up and say, teach me how to do that.  But you would just be around other people building things.  Either they would help you, kind of see you struggling.  I was such a  you know, such an idiot that I didn't know the difference between a posidrive and a Philips screwdriver until someone saw me struggling and said this would be a lot easier if you just use this other screwdriver, mate.  And I could ask someone, my soldering sucks.  I haven't done it for 20 years.  Could you help me?  Someone taught me how to solder.
      Finding a place where there's a community of makers near you where you can sit in, even if they don't do what you're sitting is a great way to shortcut experience.  If you find whatever your project is, if you can find people working even roughly in the same area, go and hang out with them.  You know, they will help you in ways that you never have anticipated.  So, I did learn a little bit of woodwork.  You know, it had been 25 years plus since I had been in a wood working shop at this point.  I could make the holes bigger, filled the holes for the strings and at the end, I had this guitar.  This was my first guitar.  Who thinks that looks like it could have been in a shop.  A few of you.  So, that's success.
      I cheated on most of that.  But it looks like a finished object and I played that guitar for the next year and a half until I made this one.  I never touched my Fender again.  Not that it was bad, it just didn't sound like I wanted.  I built something, and I played it.  That's the first guitar.
      This is also a good point to say, do I really want to do that anymore, right?  You don't have to  when you start trying something, it's perfectly valid to say, I tried it, I don't like it.  I'm moving on.  The iterative approach to getting into a new domain is a good one because not only do you minimize the kind of  the digression from what you're used to, but you can get the check points.  Is this good or should I do something else?
      I did decide that was fun, I wanted to do some more.  So, there is guitar two.  So, the idea with guitar two is, again, I will just go a little bit more out of my comfort zone than I did with guitar one.  Guitar one, I mostly bought out bits and unmodified.  I tweaked one of them.  Guitar two, I was going to build the body.  Because the bodies are kind of  solid body electric guitar, it's a 2D profile with a few pockets in it.  Not that complicated a shape.  That doesn't seem like too big a leap.  The other thing I did with guitar two is  with guitar one, I wanted a finished product, right?
      I had a need and I was solving that problem.  With guitar two, I didn't need another guitar.  I already had the guitar that I wanted.  I just built it.  So, for guitar two, I went and found someone else who wanted what I was about to build.  In this case, I went to my brother who is a gigging musician and said can I build you a guitar?  Of course.  He spec’d like natural wood, gold hardware.  He wanted it to sound good for his particular genre of music, which I call noise.  And it's, you know, this has two benefits.  One is this kind of influence takes you into places you wouldn't normally go.  And makes you look at things you wouldn't normally look like.  His tastes are totally different from mine.  Otherwise I probably would have built the same guitar three or four times and that would have got very boring.
      So, there's that.  But also, there are days no matter how much you love what it is that you have chosen as your hobby.  You are going to hate it and wish you had never started.  You need nothing is push you through.  That's why people have gym buddies.  To give you a reason to get up on the days you don't want to.  It doesn't have to be a customer in the paying sense.  You could blog about, I'm going into this robot competition or something and give yourself a kind of semipublic, or, you know, let your friends know you're going to try for it.  There are days you're going hate it and you want some motivation to get over that.
      So, I bought this nice slab of wood off of eBay.  I learned how to use the CNC router at makespace.  And I cut out the body using a 2D kind of file I found off the Internet.  So, I didn't learn anything particularly complicated.  I learned how to use one more tool and applied that.  And then I end up with this quite nice guitar body.  I think.  Most are fairly plain, this one included.  But this one looks unique.  But I didn't have to stretch myself too much.  I learned a little bit more and moved forward.
      And that would have been good had I not broken my first rule and tried to revamp it twice on this guitar.  This nearly undid me.  If you go into a gigabytes of far shop and find a guitar with gold hardware, which is what my brother had asked for, most still have nickel or stainless-steel threads.  And my brother asked for bling and he was going to get bling.  I found a neck which was unfretted.  I was buying the neck, quite complicated, and didn't have to worry about the spacing of the frets to be reasonably accurate.  I did the fret work, I watched the YouTube videos.  You know, it can't be that hard.  Correct.
      So, fret wire is the coil that you see on the left.  Fret wire comes in its kind of a mushroom shape as a profile.  You have the semicircular bit on the top of the net, and a descender that goes into the slots.  And you take the hammer there and, you know, cut little strips and hammer them in and they sit home.  Unfortunately, they're not all level now because you've just hit them with a hammer.  So, now if, if I don't have them  so, if I try to play this note and this fret was shorter than the following one I play, I would go for that, but I would get that.  And my song would probably sound rubbish.
      So, you then cover all the frets with Sharpie, you get a file.  You file them all down until you see silver.  Then you take a rocker kind of bar and find the places where it's still not quite level and repeat.  And this takes half a day or so.  At which point you've now got a bunch of frets which are all scratched and not round anymore.  You take another file, which is round, and you put the shape back in.  But at this point, they're all scuffed.  So, if you're kind of doing that kind of thing, you would hear it scraping.  You now have to polish them.  It's quite laborious and tedious.  And generally, takes me one to two days.  And it's very frustrating.
      And this is where I really wanted to turn the towel.  I to do it three times to get it right.  And each time I got it wrong, it was because I was impatient and thought I would do it quickly.  And you can't do it quickly.  You have to put in the graft to get it right.  But this is where knowing that my brother wanted the guitar, saw it through.  I knew that my brother was looking forward to this guitar.  It was worth it.  This is my brother at King Tut's Wah Hut in Glasgow.  Fairly famous, playing to about 200 people with a guitar I made him.  And in all the things, I have been working in software 20odd years, of all the things I have ever shipped, this is the most proud I have ever been, stood in that room watching this gig.  It was worth you, all the swearing was definitely worth it.
      So, that's, you know, guitar two.  You know, the lesson there is the iterative approach is good, don't try to get ahead of yourself.  You know but set up a structure so that if you do find a way to keep going for those tough days.  Because they will happen.
      So, I've now done the fret work, I might as well just make the whole bloody thing.  So, guitars three and four, the aim was to build the entire guitars from scratch.  I'm doing two at once here because there's a phase in the middle where you're just applying a coat of stain once a day to the body.  And then once that's done, a coat of oil once a day to the body.  So, it makes sense to have a couple on the go.  Here is the wood.  I'm going to say, a plank of maple and a plank of ash from the local lumberyard.  And this maple here, and this is the body from that plank.  I took the planks, I chopped in four.  Kind of did the jointing on the edge, glued it.  Back to the CNC router.  You know, this is all within comfort zone here now.  And now we know how to actually make the neck.  The necks are hard.  I keep saying that.  Let's look at why.  So, there's two bits of wood on this neck.  The main bit and the fret board.  In the middle is an adjustable metal rod, the trust rod, which you can see in the picture there.  And what happens on a guitar is when you string it up, the strings pull the head stock this way, right?
      The strings on the guitar are quite high tension.  They are bending the guitar.  And applying counterpressure the other way.  When you change the strings, do a run to get it back to the right height.  You have this constant battle between the strings and the truss rod.  So, there's mechanical stuff to get right.  The fret board, you have to get the spacings correct.  Here I have the fret board with the fret on it, glue it on.  Then do the inlays.  And what's happening here and then carving the neck.  Where you just take a really brutal file and remove the bits you don't need.  That's all.  Just remove the excess.
      It's every time I touch this neck, I'm invested heavily because I started off with bait of wood.  You know, 10 pounds for the maple.  Okay.  That's not much.  I CNC router, that's a few hours gone.  Okay.  So, 10 pounds and a few hours.  Put in the truss rod and the fret board.  Now getting up to 40, 50quid, plus the day for the glue to set.  This is a hobby, not my day job.  So, you know, time is racking up.  Now I have to drill holes for the inlays?  Come on.  I deferred doing the neck.  Not to do the neck today, do it tomorrow when I feel less harassed or whatever.  And, you know, you just have this in sunk cost that you are never going to get back if you screw it up.  And that you just have to get through.
      And, you know, again this is where having someone who wants what you're building helps you kind of get over these humps.  So, I did it.  I built my first neck, I was quite pleased.  Managed to get everything roughly right.  It was okay.  And then I was just finishing touches, penning on the tuning pegs.  First screw in at the bottom, fine, second screw, fine, and third screw, as I'm torquing it, head off the screw.  There you go.  I can't put a screw in here anymore.  This neck is now useless.  I was upset.
      But this is, again, where community comes in.  So, like a lot of people, I have an Instagram account.  I have a separate one for guitars, so I don't bore my friends too much.  But I post pictures of guitars and progress and follow a lot of other people building guitars, professional and amateur.  They are doing the same, see what other people are building.  And in general, the temptation is to post success.  This is awesome.  That's fine.  You should be proud of your accomplishments.  But also, you should post your failures.  So, I posted this picture, very despondent late at night.  And in the morning, I woke up and found I had three messages from professional luthiers around the planet saying that's okay.  That happens.  Here's what you do.
      And because  it felt stupid to do at the time because, you know, I got into this community of guitar builders by sharing in progress pictures of what I was doing.  This then paid me back when I showed my mistake.  No, it's cool.  This happens to you.  I got three techniques.  Being an engineer, I reproduced the problem.
      And so, I only have one shot at fixing this if I'm going to save it.  So, I got a bit of wood that's got the same physical properties.  I put some screws in it, sawed off the heads of the screws and tried the three different approaches.  In the end I found you can drill to the side the screw that's lost its head.  If you do it, there's a faint pencil mark where the machine head is going to be.  I'm doing it on the side you won't see.  I was able to drill a hole and wrangle out with needlenosed pliers the screw.  And I gouged the back of the head, that was annoying.  But that is out.  The standard wood working technique of filling a hole is toothpicks and wood glue.  And at the end, you sand it all down, and that's it.  There's a dark patch here, I don't know if you can match it to that.  But this neck failed.  And if I hadn't spent five minutes telling you, you would never know.
      Which brings me on to the other benefit of having someone who wants what you're doing or is keen to see what you're doing.  As a maker you often just see how far short you fell.  I had this objective.  I came, you know, close, but it wasn't what I wanted.  So, you see a negative.  It's hard to see the positives in what you're doing.  Whereas my brother didn't have a guitar, and then had a guitar and he thought it was awesome.  I look at this guitar and I see all the places I went wrong.  If you get me later, I can get you a big list.  But everyone I've given this guitar to and let them play it, oh, it's awesome.  That's why I really get a kick out of giving my guitars to people to play.  Because I then get to see the positive in it.
      That's another way.  Find a way to make sure you see that positive side.  Not just the bits where you think you fell short.  I didn't want to build an amp.  So, technically, this was a failure.  What I wanted to do was build more guitars.  But, again, it's simplifying.  So, having this guitar that was the last one that I did where I just found the design files on the Internet and copied them.
      What I wanted to do my own designs eventually.  But 3D modeling is hard.  So, again, let's keep it simple.  An amp is a box, right?  So, I  as my first project of 3D design and manufacture, I made a box.  It happens to be a useful box because this is  I kind of cut it out and there's an amp.  But it's  it's, again, it's the same principle.  How can I dumb down the problem that I'm trying to solve?  Or trying to stage, you know, a steppingstone on the way.  Because then I know the next guitar was gone in 3D design and kind of looks  kind of recognizable.  So, that guitar there was made in makerspace.  The wood was on the CNC router, laser cutted, free printed the controls.  But this has taken me by this point six or seven guitars where I'm fabricating.  And this is someone else's design I've copied, based on a Fender Mustang.  But the next will be my design.  But it's eight, nine guitars to get to where I in theory wanted to get to all that time ago.
      And that's  I guess that's, you know, it's  it's very easy to get overwhelmed and disillusioned when you pick up.  A number of people come up and look at the guitars and go, oh, I could never do that.  That's utter rubbish.  Anyone can build guitars to misquote Radiohead.  This is a picture of things gone wrong again.  On the low right, the CNC router decided my program was rubbish and actually wants to cut into the neck.  This is kind of some art project I guess on the CNC router's behalf.  This is me fixing it manually.  And this taught me about templates.  It's gone wrong.  I was despondent, but I found a way to learn from it.
      This is my list of things  the rules I try and apply.  And I think if you do project management or kind of engineering of any sort, lots are familiar.  Just applying them to your hobbies as well.  And it's just, you know, you get to have fun.  You get in a room full of people with a guitar you made which is a kind of fun sensation.  The other thing I do is I write up each week  I have a blog  I write up every week what's worked and what hasn't worked.  And how I'm going to fix it.  Yeah.  It's kind of a weekly scrum, I guess.  But, again, it's public.  I've got people who have written emails, I have that problem, thank you for sharing.  It's as much a tool for me.  I know people are watching it, and if I don't post for a week, they're going to think I've given up.  It's kind of another structure to kind of motivate me to keep going when things really suck.
      And a lot of times they really suck.  But, you know, it's just getting through and enjoying the upsides.  And if you want to see pictures of pretty, halfcomplete guitars, you can go to my Instagram as well.  That's it.  Thank you very much.
      [ Applause ]
      >> Thank you very much.  Do we have any questions?  If you have a question, throw up your arm.
      AUDIENCE: I will not  do you want to wind your own pickups?
      MICHAEL: I would love to wind my own pickups at some point.  But, again, that goes against my rule of incremental  I would love to do  the most recent guitar I built, I 3D printed the controls.  There's no sane reason to do that.  Certainly not cheaper than buying them.  But I want to do other bits incrementally.  And wire up the bits.  But, look, again, that imposter syndrome.  The title is idiot to imposter.  I had the imposter syndrome bad time when I speak to proper people who do this for a living.  I don't feel like a luthier.  I was chatting with a guy who winds pickups.  He saw a picture of the couple of guitars, and now I get trade rates from him.  And it's great.  I email him and say this guitar's going to do this kind of music.  Right, I'll wind you some pickups.  And so, again, it's having the confidence to go out into your community and not be ashamed of what you've built.  Even though you think it's amateurish, that's not what other people will see.
      >> Anyone else?  In which case, a round of applause.
      [ Applause ]
