      OpenSource Modular Tech Jewelry 
      
      merlin
      
      >> Hello and welcome to stage B.  One last public service announcement.  We can start making these public service announcements.  If everyone volunteered to do something, we wouldn't have to keep asking for volunteers.  If you have some time and you would like to contribute to EMF, we are looking for volunteers to run various roles.  Doing this on stage or doing tech support at the back of the house.  Or many, many other tasks.  So, take a look at the website to see what you can sign up for.  You can have a chat with the volunteer tent as well if you need a little bit more direction as to how you can best be helpful to everything that's going on.  Of course, we appreciate all the hard work and the volunteer time that's been put in already to organizing this great event for all of us.  So, speaking of great events, we have a fantastic speaker and I'm very much looking forward to this next presentation.
      So, we have Alex, known had as merlin.  We'll be talking about one of her latest hardware projects.  Welcome, Alex.
      MERLIN: Thanks, Becky.  Becky rocks, I took a workshop yesterday, it was amazing.  I'm Alex, I work at Hackster.io.  This is a tutorial on how to use these kits for you that are free.  Grab one.  I'll tell you about what's inside of it and there's a bunch of cool stickers and batteries.  And Jeremy is taking apart the batteries, so everyone can have one which is so nice of you.  All right.  Can everyone hear me?  Fabulous.  Okay.  So, what is this?
      It's a modular tank jewelry or general accessory system.  The way that I think about circuit diagrams figuring out a circuit that I found is I draw it in flowing lines with the power flowing from one part of the circuit to another.  To me, it doesn't make sense a lot to draw it out and in right angles and stuff.  You never know how the whole circuit is going to look.  Same thing when I'm designing something.  I wanted to build a system that lets me build electronics in the same way that I think about them and design them.
      And it's a great way to get introduced to electronics if you have never done it before.  And also, to learn PCB design.  So, this is my first set of PCBs that I've ever created.  So, basically it allows you to string together components including, for example, you can see here button, a surfacemount LEDs and resistors which I chose a large size.  You can sort them by hand.  And the little ones to have haptic motors, read switches, tilt switches whatever.  And the larger one is a coincell battery.
      I started out with a larger coincell battery shape.  A CR2032, which is quite large.  And I've since evolved that to be much smaller with the CR1220.  So, it's much more sort of jewelryfriendly at this point.  And if you come up, you can see I'm wearing an example of this that I put together.  The white wire leaves something to be desired.  You can see it's a functioning prototype.  And this is the most minimal module.  It's a 3-volt battery and a surfacemount blue LED.  Blue LEDs take enough energy that they don't necessarily need a resistor in line with them.
      They were called PB beads, it was a kidfriendly approach to electronics.  In the same way that bare conductive is basically finger painting.  And crazy circuits is Lego for electronics.  And tiny circuit  or circuit stickers are stickers for electronics.  Which are totally compatible as you can see on the right side of the image.  I wanted to embed them in spherical beads of resin.  But that was impractical, and this is easier to reproduce.
      These are all named after space things so far.  And you can see in the design here that it's really basic.  Because when I opened up eagle for the first time and I was trying to learn how to design my own PCBs, the example they give you is an entire Arduino.  If you have looked at the circuit diagram for an entire Arduino, that's extremely intimidating.  That's not your first project.
      This is simply two planes.  It can be a positive plane and a ground plane.  Or, you know, any two planes that you want.  A resistor is nonpolar.  It's two planes to connect to.  And you can plunk down a surface mount resistor or LED.  Choose which side is positive and which is ground.  You can mark on it with gold marker or whatever.  The ones next to the surface mount pads with the through hole resistor, and the top and bottom, larger components.  It's easy.  You can plunk down any kind of a footprint that you want on here as long as it's two things and you can angle it to go across them and then you're done.  And you have a custom thing and you can contribute to this open source project which is one of the most exciting parts of starting out as a maker.
      This is a little bit more complex.  It is a surface mount battery.  That one  you can tell that it's part of my efforts to learn PCB design.  Because what I actually like about it is there is little climatic lines on it, they don't make sense, but they look really naturalistic.  And I really like how organic the whole system is.
      So, what I have in these kits, since you're here, I will tell you.  You have a large battery holder.  And you have a small per star module.  Which is the one that I told you about where you can attach all the things.  And then down here you'll also find a teeny tiny surface mount blue LED which has a green line on one side for the ground side.  And also, a surface mount battery holder.
      Unfortunately, the battery holder is a little bit different from the footprint that I had to work with for the 1220 battery.  And so, there's a little bit of finagling that I've recorded a video how that will work, and I have put this on the tutorial.  This is at bit.ly/charmware.  And if you're curious about the owl, he's at bit.ly/robotowl.  We can talk about that in a second.  As I mentioned, these aren't just for LEDs and batteries.  With this minimal set you can connect censors, haptic motors, regular buttons or magnetic switches or tilt switches that detect motion or anything like that.  And in the future, since everyone's asking me, is it an Arduino?  It's going to be an Arduino.
      So, the next few modules are at tiny 80, a chip.  It can be programmed with Arduino code and I'm going to make a breakout.  The timer is good for DIY music and sound projects as well as like random periodic clicks and things of all types.  And there's also going to be a neopixel module and things like that.  But for now, I'm just kind of firming up the design.  Yeah.  The process of designing this has had its pitfalls.  And I would love to share some of those with you.  But first, some more example circuits.
      So, the one that I'm wearing is the kit that you're going to get if you just come up and pick it up afterwards.  And that's basically the battery and LED.  I also have a little tester that's just like a battery plus two little probes.  More demo circuits, a battery plus, a resistor plus an LED.  And you can turn it into a bracelet or whatever.  I want to show you another feature of this necklace as well, which is that it has a magnetic clasp at the back.  And the cool thing about the magnetic clasps is that they're made of metal.  Which means that you can  oh, no  you can solder to them and then you can lose them around your neck because you made your necklace way too long.  I had to wrap it all the way around and be cute.  There we go.
      Okay.  So, there we go.  You can see the LED light turning on and off.  And that's just because it's a little magnetic clasp.  It's supercool.  Those you can get on Amazon or whatever.  This is the circuit sticker, the coin cell holder and the LED circuit sticker.  And there's a haptic motor one.  And unfortunately, we can't zoom in camera or whatever, but you can see them after the fact.  I'm excited what you do as well.
      So, more about this part.  It's a USbased PCB manufacturer.  All of this stuff, as the name implies is open source.  It's all open source projects people have uploaded.  And they offer this half height service where are PCB is half as thick as a regular one.  Which is really awesome for esthetics but doesn't work for jewelry.  It's sharp and bitey.  It's not nice.  And you can order a lot of them, and the PCB is fully routed out.  This is something you want to check if you're designing your own PCB.  The earlier ones have the rough bits on the sides called mouse bites.  That's because they were assembled together in a panel and broken out of the panel one by one.  Kind of like old Army figures.  Right?  And as a result, they have serrated edges.  And you can get large numbers of PCBs fully routed out.  So, the new ones that you're going to get are supersmooth around the edges and really nice.
      Another thing I learned is that I designed some  some diffuser modules.  Let me show you.  This is OSH Park, the place you can order the PCBs.  You can order them yourself, actually.  What's the previous version?  Oh, I haven't shared it.  No!  Because it kind of sucked.  So, the thing with that is that turns out Eagle has a setting for whether or not your vias are coded with solder mask.  And I made these two little diffuser modules with a bunch of tiny via holes in them.  If you have an LED on a wearable, you want to diffuse it, shine through a bunch of little holes.  It would be nice.  Yeah, turns out all those little holes are going to be covered up if you don't set this one thing in Eagle, which is called tenting.  If you're designing a PCB where you want light to shine through it, you have a couple options.  You can make a bare section of the PCB with no copper or solder mask.  Or put little ones through it and set the tenting threshold low enough so that it doesn't fill it with solder mask.
      I have soldering and assembly demos.  I'm at the hardware hacking area later on.  Hit me at Twitter, it's glowascii, spelled like this.  And you can follow me for a bunch of stuff about charmware.  Again, as I mentioned before, these were designed based on the way that I envisioned circuits.  Come on, load.  How to keep  I haven't figured that out yet.  I think maybe hot glue is the answer.  But I would love to hear your ideas.
      And basically, this is the design.  So, one of the key features here is that you'll see these large holes on the edges.  And those are because when you're soldering something that needs to move around with the body.  You're going to get a lot of flex and strain on that solder joint.  And the problem with that is that obviously it's going to break.  Especially if you're sort of like wearing it every day and stuff.  You can stabilize it with hot glue, but that doesn't look very good.  The other thing I have built in here is folds.  You basically  thread the wires through the big holes on the sides so that it pulls on sort of the wire itself with friction and not on the solder joint.
      I also want to hear what ya'll want to build with these.  I bet there's some much cooler ideas than I've got going on here.  And there's a little bit more about why they were designed the way they were and stuff.  But yeah.  As I mentioned, it is an open source project.  So, I want to hear what you would plan to make with this.  And either I will make it, or you will make it and the world will be a better place.  So, check out bit.ly/charmware.  And if you want to hear about the owl, go to bit.ly/robotowl and find me on Twitter or Instagram.  But what I want to do right now since everyone is still in their seats is have you come up and get a kit.  And ideally a battery from Jeremy on the way out.  But for right now, let's do some questions if anyone wants to know anything.
      >> Yes, we just ask that you wait for the microphone, so everyone can hear your question before you ask it.
      MERLIN: Also, I want to make like epilets and things, not just jewelry.
      AUDIENCE: I have never the PCB design and want to get into it.  This seems like a cool project to get into.  I only understood a few of the things you said about the process.
      MERLIN: Yeah, so, SparkFun has some really great tutorials with getting started with Eagle.  One of the most popular choices, probably between eagle and KiCad and upverter is getting.  And for KiCad, I think Chris who does the empire cod cast, he does a series for KiCad, he made it better and glowy in every way.  It's better.  There's also like a versioning PCB art movement which is really exciting.  People doing sweet badges and stuff.  All kinds of stuff to explore there we can talk about.
      AUDIENCE: Hi.  I was just wondering how compatible this would be with conductive thread or any kind of conductive material that could take strain?
      MERLIN: The strain relief would probably help with that.  The thing with conductive thread  I think it's awesome that it exists, and people use it.  I personally hate working with it because it's not very flexy resistant or, you know, it doesn't have a lot of flexy strength.  And so, I think that especially given that the sharp edges of the PCB, even in the little holes, it has a little bit of a sharp edge, it would probably wear through the conductive thread even faster.  But what you could do actually is use a bunch of regular thread to sew it down and put the conductor thread with no strain ton it.  That would probably help because it wouldn't be rubbing and moving around as much.  I would love to see that.  Hi, Alex.
      AUDIENCE: So, have you tried filing down the edges of the PCB?
      MERLIN: You could totally do that.  The PCB substrate, the middle part, the base, is made of fiberglass.  It's called FR4, and as I know from snapping apart a bunch of these, it gets into your skin as little slivers and is not pleasant.  I would not recommend filing it down.  You could try other methods.  You could coat it with hot glue.  It's a great stabilizer and to insulate stuff each other.  It doesn't look good, but put hot glue or heat shrink on it.  I wonder if you got a really big diameter of heat shrink if you could cut a thin slice and put it around the edge?  That would be pretty cool.
      What's up?  Conductive paint?  Yeah.  Totally.  You would, again, have to seal that because conductive is water soluble, right?  Yeah, thrilling.  And I suggested putting a glob of bare conductive paint over the conductive thread and putting super glue on the outside to seal it.
      AUDIENCE: What's the best way of attaching electronics to clothing such that you can remove it such that when you want to wash the clothing?
      MERLIN: I think maybe magnets.  That's sort of my favorite.  But you could also do Velcro, obviously.  I just prefer  there's some kind of Velcros that are really low profile, but I think in general it looks kind of messy.  I'm focused on esthetics.  Velcro is a viable solution.  I just wrap it around.  I'm a big fan of harnesses and wrapping things, honestly, I go that way.  Snaps are a big one.  Especially with conductive thread.  They sew on to the snaps and you can use that as a switch as well as just an attachment mechanism.
      >> Anyone else?
      MERLIN: I feel like I'm constrained here.  Don't need the computer anymore.  I'm free.  Yeah, come and get boards, yeah, yeah, yeah.
      AUDIENCE: You mentioned the esthetics earlier and you also mentioned resin.
      MERLIN: Resin, yes.
      AUDIENCE: These obviously really look like circuit boards.  Was your thought to make them literally look for like these and more like jewelry.
      MERLIN: The idea with the resin was to make them look like beads.  I loved the fact that they were basically the same.  It still wouldn't have the same mechanism.  You would have to figure out a way to solder into the sides of the beads.  I would still love to do that I think it would be really beautiful.  Especially the LEDs sort of embedded in a cloudy resin.  You would get this beautiful sort of glowy effect.  I love the idea.
      However, resin is such a sort of fidgety thing.  And especially giving out 80 kits at a talk, that would be really, really difficult for me, honestly.  And there are ways of getting it manufactured and stuff too.  If you have any ideas, I would love to hear.
      AUDIENCE: I've only just started playing with resin and it was more of a nightmare than I thought it was going to be.
      MERLIN: I know, right?
      AUDIENCE: So hot glue, yeah.  I get it.  It works great but doesn't look quite so good.  Maybe hot glue in a mold?  The point of a finishing process, you build the thing first and the mold clips around and fill it with the hot glue.  You kind of don't want the awkwardness of the soldering.  The soldering with the pieces as they are is great and easy.  If you could finish it by going bead, bead, bead.
      MERLIN: That's a great idea.
      AUDIENCE: And holds the strain release as well.
      MERLIN: I never thought of that.  You create the soldering first and create the beads around it.  Plus, that solves the problem of not being able to solder without melting the hot glue.  That's fantastic.
      AUDIENCE: And you end up with a chain of beads as a bracelet or a necklace or whatever.
      MERLIN: Yeah.  That reinforces that.  Hit me up on Twitter and I would love to try it out and give you credit.  Or you try it out and share it.  Or whatever.  This is the user name.  Yay!  I'm so pleased.  There's also a bunch of stickers there.
      [ Applause ]
      Not sure where we are on time.  1:32.  Perfect.  I've got like eight minutes or something.  Cool.  Come grab kits and stickers and come chat with me if you want to see the  more of the little demos and stuff.  Yeah!  Thank you.  Thank you, Becky, thank you, everyone, thank you, Jeremy.  Yay!
