      Out daemons, out!  Exploring depression through sweary automata
      
      J. HawkesReed
      
      
      J. HAWKESREED: Thank you very kindly.  So, mostly I hack on things that don't exist.  And sometimes I build things and sometimes they work and sometimes they don't.  I haven't got my reading glasses, so, if I stop and stare at the thing, that's because I'm old and terrible.  So, I'm going to talk quite a lot about depression.  So, if that's going to be a bit painful for you, then please look out for yourself.
      It's  I'm quite happy to talk about bleak things because they happen to me.  And if that's a bit grim for you  these things happen.  Also, this clock hates me.  But  so, anyway.  A few years ago, I was working in Bath.  And what happened was, as Jethro doesn't say, all the technical team apart from two of us left pretty much in a two-month period which was kind of terrifying.  And I took to wandering around Bath just to get out of the office.  And so, I could stop thinking about Zen or Redis or PHP or managers that I wanted to die a slow and painful death.
      So, one of the things that Bath has is parades of terrible shops selling terrible things.  And one of them was a toy shop.  But in there, there were signs of all kinds of things that didn't exist.  And didn't have enamored signs and they were wooden toys that you give to children and they stare at going, where do the batteries go?  And robots, that children weren't allowed to play with because they had lead paint and had sharp objects and were terrible things and shouldn't have been in a toy shop in the first place.  And I kind of wanted one.
      I got a tin robot that looked like it was about to have a psychotic break and set about it with a welding torch.  So, like this, we were doing DevOpsy things.  You were supposed to have this to do lots of deploys.  Yay, big red switch.  However, our deploy rig would have needed this.
      And this was awful.  But we were kind of working on it.  And there were only two of us out of a team of seven left.  And we were going to catch fire and die.  And in this state, I thought the best thing in the world would be to build a robot that would be around the office and discover who had broken the build and call them the bullocks.  Because obviously public humiliation is a great way for employee well-being.  Public humiliation makes everything better.  Everybody knows this.  That's sarcasm.  Public humiliation was why my exemployer's code was in a terrible state.
      And it came together, and I thought, bot, here we go.  And I ordered a bunch of bits off the Internet because that's what the Internet's for.  And started hacking away and it kind of all went really well.  And it was great.  And I think  so, this is a test rig.  Unfortunately, there's no sound.  But what happened was, it nearly mostly worked.  But it had a strange failure mode where this thing  what you can't hear is that it's mumbling to itself in bad speech synthesizer.  And what it tended to do was just rock back and forth swearing quietly to itself.
      [ Laughter ]
      It would take, you know, it's about my bathroom.  It's just attacking the first thing it can find, which was my feet.  And it just won't take piss off for an answer.  So, it would just find a dark corner and just hide in it and just go bullocks and shit, bullocks and shut.  And it was at this point that I had built a depressed robot that couldn't cope.  Store that image away for later.
      So, the grim thing about this is is that there is no happy ending.  I fell into a particularly nasty depression at this point.  And never finished it.  And what's worse is that the bloody computer stopped.  I posted about it on LJ and my friends were like, that's a brilliant idea.  That's completely you.  And I'm like, thank you.  And about 12 months later, after I recovered a bit more, it's just not playing, will it.  It's playing but won't stop playing.  Let's see what happens.  Computers, right?  So, anyway.  It's awful.  I saw all these happy messages about the stuff I hadn't done, and it was like awful.  And made everything worse.  And reading that sort of thing can really, really make you hate yourself because you then  I can do a thing!  It's great.  And you now, it's like, well, I fucked that one up.
      And you've let your friends down.  And you didn't finish the project.  I mean, you never finish that project, come on, who are you kidding?  You never finish a damn thing.  Your house is littered with dead projects.  The computer works finally.  You're full of whacky ideas, if it was a sitcom it would be funny.  But it wouldn't be funny because they're not funny.  You let people down.  You're a loser.  You shouldn't do this sort of thing.  Not bother your friends with your exciting things.  They never turn out right.  Just stop.  Don't bother your friends at all.  Be quiet, shut up, do your work.  Do nothing.  Depression is a right fucking bastard.  Do not listen to it.  So, the good thing is, I got better.  Thank you.
      [ Applause ]
      So, a few years  it was a couple years ago now I'm trashed at the bar having finished a  volunteering at a science fiction convention.  And the best thing in the world slipped into my head, which was a cuckoo clock that called you a twat.  I mean 
      [ Applause ]
      Who on Earth wouldn't want one of these?  So, eBay's amazing.  I mean, eBay's terrifying, but it's amazing.  It turns out there are many cuckoo clocks.  They come in pink.  They also come  I mean, this is a  a German chap's art project.  And he made cuckoo clocks out of disturbing buildings from I think the exBerlin.  But anyway.  About this time, I discovered the joy of the 266, a microcontroller.  They're about 9 pence.  They have much more grunt than an Arduino, but less IO.  But it was fine.
      And that was just gonna be fun.  But damn things come with lure, which is horrible.  I did write a thing here about banging on about favorite toy languages.  I couldn't be dealing with lure.  Because reasons  it will drive me up the wall.  It made me hate myself.  I'm sure the designers of the language didn't envisage that, but it does.  It was the only thing for a long time.  And anyway.
      I discovered Ruby because that's what all configuration management stuff was written in and it was night and day.  And there's I think this notion that the language that fits your head better is less likely to gaslight you and is better for your mental health.  This is certainly my thoughts on it which is what you paid to get in.  Nothing.  Yay!
      But anyway.  Where was I?  I got a cuckoo clock.  I built this cuckoo clock.  Now, this video will probably break the same way as the other one.  But very eventually.  Stuff it.  We'll get there.  While this thing isn't doing its thing, there's 
      [ Laughter ]
      Finally.  Don't worry about the next.  It doesn't work.  Nail varnish was a week old by then.  So, this thing bread boarded.  Up I don't know why I'm gesturing at that.  It's over there.  Everything was great.  I had a cuckoo clock.  It called you a bastard.  On the hour.  And I boxed it up, Ver oboard, soldering, and it didn't work.  There are two black wires, the hour trigger.  I've got them wrong way up.  Anybody can do it.  It didn't work.  Well, get on a bit.  I need a magnifying hat to see small solder now because old age.  It will be my soldering.  Anybody can do it.  I'll just stare at all the joints and it will be fine.  And it didn't work.
      So, that daemon, the thing that tells me I'm rubbish and told me many things.  You're a Muppet, nobody cares, it's just a stupid idea.  Just stop.  You can't.  You don't know what you're doing.  And we're here again.  So, the weird thing is about depression is that it comes along with imposter syndrome and anxiety and a bunch of other stuff.  Which are rubbish.  And here's the thing.  If I put the clock in test mode  this is a live demonstration, I've never seen, if you're of an age to have ever watched Blue Peter.  So, an accurate representation of the inside of my head when I'm having a bad time and I can get the sodding USB connection because I haven't got my rigging glasses.
      So, try and have a conversation with the rest of your head and there's a thing in the back of your head that's just interrupting you the whole time.  You can't think straight.  You just got this noise and you're trying to tell people things.
      >> Shit.
      J. HAWKESREED: Is it's your voice telling you that you're an idiot all the time.  And everybody likes swearing.  Where was I?  Just here.  So, the way I visualized the inside of my head it owes a lot to UNIX.  This is a break extraction, a rubbish idea, don't do this at home.  Thank you.
      One of the things about models, I guess, is an overloaded system and it's crashing, and half of your cognitive function is running, and you can't do a damn thing because you're spending all your time trying to shut that out of control daemons, which are calling you a bastard.  And your brain is like treacle because your memory is just crashing, and everything is terrible.
      And so, the joke here is that my demons are daemons.  Which looks funny written down.  As does the ad lib that I just wrote down.  So, it's not an ad lib.  Where was I?  Oh, over here.  That's nice.  So, one of the things the demons  I would like to point out that this has nothing to do with symptoms or anything like that.  It's just I have this model of what's going on in my head and it's shouty UNIX daemons.  Because I'm a sport.  And what they'll do is get really busy and remind me of a time when I was at a party in 1983 when I made a twat of myself when I'm on an A road.  You're not killing me that way.  Or a slide show of my worst moments, 19841985, would be the best time to show me when I'm trying to fall off to sleep.  Little bastards.  Here we are.  Imagine if you will a thing which insults you with your own voice.
      what could it be?  And at this point weirdly sitting in a cafe in North London eating a salad and drinking tea out of a mug staring out the window, I became enlightened.  I kind of realized that actually what I had been doing is building automata that were external versions of the things that were in my head.  No, no, that's okay.
      So, this is actually a thing.  I was chatting to an actual artist.  I don't think she was wearing a rollup  but I described this and she was like, yeah.  Why do you think you're special?
      [ Laughter ]
      Well, and so, I kindly just  it call came collapsing down on itself.  It was like, right.  So, I build things to come to terms with the stuff that's going on.  Okay.  Let's store that one away too.  I was in Glastonbury the other month.  You can just about see Glastonbury behind the Volvo with the reefer.  Volvo?  Yeah.  No.  Anyway.  Glaston is great.  It's filled with rail yards.  That's railway yards and shops.  And a tour which is there and there and there.  Anyway.
      So, the thing  the brilliant thing is that the shop on the high street, it's opposite the shop that will sell you homemade baguettes and chips for about a quid.  And it is filled with wooden toys and robot arms and skittery robots that light up.  And I wanted to buy one of everything and send it through a time machine to my past self and say, it's all right.  Just make all of it.  Break it, paint it green.  I don't care.  Just do it.  This is the best thing.  However, the machine is impossible, and my past self would be really freaked out if that happened.  I sent a bunch of stuff to my brother's kids and kept some for myself.  Obviously.  Because who would not wish for a flying unicorn.
      And I realized I've bought another automata thing.  And now I know how this stuff works.  What is going to come out?  And I was driving back from Glastonbury, up the road to Bristol because I live in Bristol and drive to Bristol.  If I lived somewhere else, it would be stupid.  When I realized exactly what I was doing.  Which was that.
      Now, some, none or all of you may have some notion of a significance of the color scheme.  Or not.  Have I finished?  So, that happened.  And I'm not sure  yay.  So, if there's a point here, it's that bugger depression.  Find ways of explaining it to yourself.  That might help.  Those are my ways of explaining it to myself.  And that about covers it.  I wouldn't actually ask me for any useful information other than if you're having problems with Kubernetes.  Because I know about as much about that as I do about depression.  So, that about covers it.
      [ Applause ]
      In anybody's got any questions, you're weird.  But fire away.
      [ Laughter ]
      I was going to  about.  Oh, right, so, I was  and this  so, software and hardware will gaslight the shit out of you and it's really bad for your mental health.  Two examples.  One, Kubernetes itself.  The liveness probe.  If you read the documentation, it says as long as your container is returned anything between 200 and 399.  Everything is good.  Kubernetes will keep your kit running.  Bullshit.  So, the documentation for this is in a  hold on, 2015  threeyearold PR on GitHub at the bottom of a locked filing cabinet, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  And I didn't find it straight away and I wrote a thing and stuck it on KA and it didn't start and it was just complaining, and the return code was wrong.  It's in the documentation.  You're supposed to work, you fucker.  Blasted thing.
      And I struggled with this for days.  And I thought I was a complete idiot because I can't work simple containers.  And the instructions said they should work.  Reality said it didn't.  Well, Google are never wrong.  Really, I'm an idiot.  No.  Google can't write documentation to save their lives.  It turned out, actually, that I  friend of a friend works for them and I complained mightily on FaceAche.  And they said they are wrong, sort yourselves out, lads.  The pro, 16squillion bytes of memory which you can't use.  This is hidden at the bottom of a GitHub pier from three year ago in a locked filing cabinet marked "Beware of the leopard."  And I have one of these.  And I got in the thing, and I've blown it up, I'm an idiot and I can't work electronics.  And I got another one, it worked because it was a slightly less good version with less memory.  Anyway.  Everything is terrible.  Beware the pit that tries to gaslight you.  It will destroy your brain.  And that is not a useful behavior pattern for things that people have made for other people.  But anyway, questions.  Apart from, will you shut up?
      AUDIENCE: Is that working?  Yes.  Thank you for the talk.  That's lovely.  The one about demons.
      J. HAWKESREED: Yes.
      AUDIENCE: I'm quite old to be a parent and I have small children.  And the question is when can I show my 8yearold an alien?
      J. HAWKESREED: Now, so, monster stories for children.  I was feeling a bit guilty about this.  I thought, I don't know.  Then I met this woman from Mexico who is good.  Parenthood is just one long series of guilt trips.  Don't worry, all right?  Now, it turns out  it seems monsters in children's stories are a way of externalizing things they can't understand.  Now, I think if somebody looked on Google, which is never wrong, they would figure out the citation for that.  But it's an interesting thought that the externalization of things is an important step in growth.  I would like to pass that comment.
      AUDIENCE: I fully admit that I'm slow and have to work things out for a lot of this brain stuff because being depressed for part of the time doesn't work, your brain works slower and hates itself.  But, yeah.  Yep.  Yeah.
      >> Questions?
      J. HAWKESREED: Hit the bar now.  Bastard.
      AUDIENCE: Now you sort of see the process working a bit more, can you see the automata coming earlier?
      J. HAWKESREED: Maybe?  I don't know.  Work in progress.  I shall find out.  Maybe the next thing I build I don't know what it will be.  I suspect now that I understand what's going on, I want to go back and build the sweary robot out of a sense of spite if nothing else.  Because 
      [ Applause ]
      Maybe one more question?
      AUDIENCE: Really quick one.  Your flying unicorn 
      J. HAWKESREED: Yes.
      AUDIENCE: Does it do anything that it didn't do when it started or just a thematically appropriate color scheme?
      J. HAWKESREED: It's got a stepper motor in there.  But if you use it for longer than five minutes, it tends to catch fire.
      AUDIENCE: Excellent.  It is a burning flying unicorn.
      J. HAWKESREED: Yes, worryingly enough, I got the colors slightly wrong, so it's got that vibe of, as you say, grand attack.  For frustrating people you do not like.  But I love it to pieces because it's just like  it's a complete thing and it worked.  And I had a whale of a time just because I few what I was doing.  What was in my head.  It was just like, ha ha ha ha!  Not exactly like that.  That would be weird.  I mean, that's probably close to Stewart Lee.  Anyway.  Yeah.  Somebody drag me off stage.  I don't know.  Can I stop now?
      >> Yes.
      J. HAWKESREED: Thank you!
      [ Applause ]
      >> Thank you.

