      Shaping sound
      
      Gianluca Memoli
 
      >> [captioner standing by for audio] to do that, I used  levitation, and  the power supply for the cord lands, but you can levitate  and so, what I'm doing here is I'm getting some polystyrenes, I'm live.  And I take the polystyrenes and put them here away, which is between two sets of speaker, and that's why you don't hear them.  And we need a bit of housekeeping.  And I know that's the people cleaning this room after that.  But eventually when it works, something levitates.  Let me show you the video.  And you can go and try.  I had someone try that earlier to check that it was working.  Well, you can try it later.  and so, same shape.  But what you really want  what you want is to control  what you see is that you create basically a shape.  So, you create the shape which states the particle and you can see the float.  So, the problem with these technologies  so, before we can actually use them, is that the cost ramps up so, transfusers are very easy.  Speakers are easy to control, but you need a lot of them if you want to have control.  A special control into the audience, for instance.  And then there is a physics image because the speakers are big.  They need to be big because sound as a wavelength, which is quite big, so, they do not respond to  so, there is a technology image in the speakers.  And the same place.  What they do is they use lenses.  And what we do with those is we use reflectors which change the shape of light.  We use lenses to  we put object in the middle between the source so the light and myself to change what happens to the light.
      So why can't we do that?  It's sound.  These devices have been around for a lot of time for light.  So, they actually did it, and you can find it in it.  So, we normally use these things in our everyday life.  Why can't we use them for sound?  I think we can use them for sound.  Let me show you what we can do without going that direction, but the other direction, this way.
      So, that is the example of a lighthouse.  And what they do is use a lens to send light away long, long distances.  What you see down there is the design, the measurements that I visited with my special lenses for sound.  It projects the sound of the speaker from here to the  down there in one, I believe.  All of these, so, what is meta materials?  Metamaterials are devices which are engineered to have a special property.
      Well, with saying that, I said nothing.  Because what this was, I can describe everything.  I can describe a guitar.  I can describe a Schroeder diffuser that's on top.  And the trick and that these materials, and I have some of them here, can be made of any actual material.  But you can shape them inside so that the sound gets delayed in this particular case.  So, what do they look like?  Well, this is a big version, so, this is a big lens, and this covers the highest note of a piano.  Quite bully, isn't it?
      But also, you can have them in the shape of the soda cans.  This is the first lens that I served.  This is done with a trick that you use to make a xylophone with glasses.  You fill the glasses with different depths of liquid and in this way, you can send the sound around.  You see the speakers in the corner there, and they created a spot.  Now, what was mine for this, I found that actually you can do this in a much simpler way and you just need Legolike bricks to do this.  So, instead of taking the cans and filling them every time, you can adjust it 16 times for cans, or shapes, to give you maximum control on sound beyond what you can just see.  Just like you need 26 letters to make any word.  So, how do they work?  What they do is they  well, I have a microphone here.  Let me go closer.  So, what  how do they apply?  They are like objects.  You can't change the size of the inside, and you can have a go at this after my talk.  By changing the size of the maze, you change the sound that passes inside like the picture.  And you see that depending on the length of the maze, you change a different delay.  What you see in this picture is a wave which takes more and more time to reach this point here.
      So, in this way you control phase just like you do that with a processing, but in a positive way.  So, what you can do with it then is by using these bricks, you can do obviously levitation.  So, what that one is  I went too quick.  So, let me try this one first.  And you can hear the background.  That is my son keeping himself occupied while I talk to you.
      And we use 16 of those bricks.  And by but thing them together  and you can see that I'm doing this very quick in this movie  it doesn't take so  it's not so quick in real life.  What you can do is you can make patterns.  And so, with these patterns, two of them, I can put them together and I can make them to levitate.  Which is what I needed so with the speaker and the two object I printed, I can do levitation.  And I can do much more.  Levitation is a way for me to show you that I have control.  Is a way for me to show that I have the power.  In reality, levitation is something that maybe  well, it managed to bring me on ITV to levitate food.  But not maybe as far from the levitation.  Unless we can control it so well that we can use this type of control into the body, for instance, to deliver medicines.
      But since this is a friendly community, let me tell you you can do more.  Suppose you don't have space  how you don't want to print 16 types of bricks, what you can do is you can use techniques to use less of them.  And these are very similar to the one you use in compressing images in doing a JPEG, for instance.  And in this way, I'm using less of them.  11 if I remember correctly in this one.  And still, I can get levitation.  And if I can go further, I can then levitate with just eight bricks.
      Which means that if you can be clever, then given a space, and some requirements on the sound that you want to control, then you can transform one of these, which is bulky, into one of those.
      And they have the same effect on a normal speaker.  Now, what's the problem?  The problem is that you  the limit, well, the advantage of the problem is that at the moment the limit is how small you can make this with 3D printing.  And the problem is, the other bit is at the moment compared to a lot of speakers controlled electronically by processing is that this solution is static while the others are dynamic.  But we learned from optics that turning lenses into something dynamic is not too difficult.  You can use that for headsets in 3D displays.  Let me go to applications.  What are we doing here?  Well, we are wasting my time here at 10:00.  So, this was Iron Man.  And so, as a scientist I feel that I always try to catch up with all of it.  That is one of my challenges at the moment.  And what you see here is that soon to become Iron Man is trying to find vibranium.  But there is something in this which is implicit.
      So, it's not just a hologram there which you can pass through.  It's not just telling the computer, please spin.  You can do more than that  you can actually  and this is even clearer later in the movie  you can actually touch the stuff.  So, it's doing what is technically  you see that.  Spins it just like that.  So, he knows where to put his arms.  This is called technically metered optics.  Can we do that already?  Yes, we can with speaker arrays.  So, this is a company in Bristol which sells devices which transport shapes that are made of sound.
      So, how does it work?  You have a lot of speakers.  And if they send the sound at the same time on your hand, you feel nothing.  But if you time that with different delays, then this eventually creates a spot on your hand and you feel something.  And if you create many spots at the same time, then you can create shapes.  And so, then, in this case, you can then create the outside of the sphere.  So, can I do that with my contain centers yes, and I can do much more.  I can get shapes which are more complex all at one time.
      So, we have a demo here  I have a demo here where you will be able to touch sound if you come a bit later.  But what I want so show you and thus what I'm going to do now is this.  So, this is again, catching up with Hollywood.  This the Minority Report, 2002.  And now, if we had the audio, we could be hearing that Tom Cruise is passing around, straight  and the adverts.  [advertisement noise]
      That's the messages.  That is sound just as he's passing by.  Can we do that?
      >> Lexus.  The road you're on, John  was the one less traveled.  Surely  [competing advertisements]
      GIANLUCA: So, at the moment, this is what we are showing and let me show you how it works.  You have a speaker.  So, this is one made by us at Sussex, so, in house.  Let me show you some of our works.  Let me show you some of the Beatles.  It is something which is already out there.  Let me show you what you can do with the materials.  [ Away from microphone ]  and I can shape this in a way that it rolls around this  and  there is a space  or  we've also got the  [ Away from microphone ] so, there are a lot of  and we know that is  that is the sound.  [ Away from microphone ] this is the one where we would not  and when we left, really shapes on our  we can touch.  But instead of having personalized arrays, I can have a shape.  But I can feel that if  then I  or we were going to [inaudible]  and  you can learn a language just by changing  [ Away from microphone ] that we have it in our  but we don't.  [ Away from microphone ]  for controlling your cars.  [ Away from microphone ]  specifically to the left.  So, thanks for your attention.  And I hope you enjoyed my talk and we are recruiting for this if you are interested.
      And otherwise, please ask your questions.  Thanks a lot.
      [ Applause ]
      So, any questions?  Otherwise, come and play. 
      >> Excuse me, hello? 
      >> That should be on.  This one is working.  One, two, one, two. 

