      SHA2017  Behind the scenes of a hacker conference
      
      Julius ter Pelkwijk
      
      
      >> Okay.  The next talk is Julius from the SHA conference organizers to show us a hacker conference.
      JULIUS: Hi, all.  Normally I'm not on stage.  For me, it's my first time, actually.  For those that don't know anything about SHA, thank you for being here.  Still hacking anyway.  It's a big, large conference.  3600 attendees.  It's back in Holland.  We had around the fastest Internet on a camp possible at the time.  I'm to the sure how fast it is here, but it was fast down there.
      It's a fiveday festival.  It's similar to EMF.  But it's way bigger and it also requires a lot of experience and, well, there's  I will talk to you about it on what it's going to be.
      Who am I?  My name is Julius.  This is the best picture they could get for me.  I'm the secretary of IPCOT.  Just joined around December of 2015.  Just when they really started to get up.  And I have been with IPCOT ever since.  And basically, I'm going to talk to you a bit about how things were going to progress, what we experienced, the good parts, the bad parts, and everything else.
      A bit of history.  If  basically the hacker community goes a long way.  I couldn't find all the pictures of all the events.  The ones that I do know is EdSHA.  That was back in 2009, if I'm correct.  They had a great event and they wanted to start again in 2013.  But to start in 2013 it meant a lot of legal things, a lot of professionalism.  So, eventually, starting in 2013 we had a proper foundation.
      some things do go wrong and some things did go wrong, and because of that, it took us almost five years to get Still Hacking Anyway.  And the name refers a bit to the fact that no matter what goes in our path, no matter what happens, we're still hacking anyway.
      But to say that organizing an event is easy.  No.  It's a lot of things that will come in your way.  A lot of pipe shedding, a lot of talking, a lot of communication.  You have a lot of paperwork.  You have a lot of things.  You cannot simply organize an event just like that.  For the organization, we had around 35 teams all working together.  I called them here, so you can see a bit of what the teams are a bit like.  We had, for example, we had the bar food court vendors grouped together.  We had the content, decoration, design, logistics was basically they split themselves up because they were too big.
      We had the drama, we had the lighting.  We had all kinds of people working on making SHA possible.  That also meant that some things were completely filled with people.  Most of the time, we didn't have enough volunteers.  But it also meant that some teams were understaffed.  One of the things that I found out late  just during the event was that we had a really short understaffing on qualified parking personnel.  So, we either had to grab outside professionals or I had to stand there for ten hours in the full sun just making sure that traffic got directed where they have to be.
      Communication.  One of the things that you have to do at the camp is communication.  That's basically it.  If you want to know who is doing what, you need to communicate.  At SHA we had a lot of communications.  We had our own Wiki.  Which meant that people knew who was in what team.  We had etherpads.  Everything that was set on the wall, they got written down in etherpads.  Everyone could change it.  The lists were put on the native pads.  Well, basically all my paperwork was mostly on etherpads.  We had  because most people were outside the country.  We had Germans, we had a Finnish guy helping out.  We had people here from the UK.  And to communicate with each other, we could use Skype, but with more than 100 people on Skype, it doesn't work, so we used Mumble for that.  File sharing, similar issue.  We used C file.  Some used the oldfashioned telephone.  Some with Skype if you could not communicate.  We just used those things.  A lot of emails.  I don't know how many emails were sent to me and all us, but I think info desk got about 1500 emails just sent to them.
      One of the good things was for our security team, we used a system called FAIR.  It's open source and it's basically a Kanban board where people could quickly put things on.  And for every incident that we had, we could later see what was really going on.  Besides that, we had many more things, too many to list.  We had Kanban boards, we had Google Docs.  There was just so many ways of communicating.  It's  yeah.  Sometimes it surprised me.
      When you start an event, first thing's first.  You need to get a field.  And when I say a field, you need a field that gets big enough.  And also, you need to get teams to get organized.  At SHA we started  they started here in 2016  no  even before that.  They started at the CCC.  And basically, tried to get people together.
      But getting people together doesn't work.  You also need to get them out on the fields.  Experience what it is on the fields, how it would look like, where will things be placed?  One of the things we had for  as an idea was to put an HQ down.  Eventually we stripped it and just went for basic equipment.  And tents.  You have to stick with a team.  The thing that we had and that took a really long time was getting a good team together.  People were thinking, then they got shuffled around.  I got five different stickers with five different team on them.
      But eventually when you have a team, you have a field and then you have  well, you say well, you know, this is the team that we have.  Will we be able to commit ourselves to actually build an event?  Because you have ideas, you have things.  But you have to have a go or a nogo moment.  I took this picture.  And this one is from the deciding field day.  It was August 2016.  Less than a year from the event.  And by then we said, okay.  Are we going to do it or are we not?  We went to the field down there.  We had the camping, people slept there.  We measured the whole field out.  We said, eventually, we asked that everyone, like, yeah.  Would you like to be on this field? And everyone just said, yes.
      But when you have all these things, always expect the unexpected.  Because you think everything goes smoothly until you have issues or things that just go wrong.  Later on that 
      When you have a field, and you have an agreement, you need to go official.  On the right side, that's our  that's our lead guy.  He went to the municipality.  He said, well, you know, we want to make  we want to make an event.  Yes, we can.  All kinds of things.  And the first thing he had to do was sign a paper and then things get official.  As soon as you sign the paper, there's a 12week marker starting where the municipality will ask you a lot of questions where you have to prove that you can actually start an event where you can show that you have known about all kinds of things about safety plans, about tents.  Where are they gonna be?  We send a lot of agreements with vendors.
      We had to send licenses for broadcasting.  We had a radio channel down there.  So, they had to get licenses.  We had the special radios for our phones.  They needed to get licenses.  For the lasers, we need to get a  so, another organization had to look into it.  We had sponsors.  The batches, they had to pay import taxes.  We had to send letters to various people.  Basically, a lot of paperwork it just sending stuff to the  to municipalities, to governments and saying, yes, we are doing it.  Yes, we are official.  And when they have questions, you have to answer them within three or four weeks or else your stuff doesn't get through and you have to try it again.
      But we got there.  Also, one thing that we had to get was official licenses for the people that were on the parking.  If you wanted to stand on the public roads, you need to get a license.  And for that you need to speak Dutch and you need to do all kinds of things.  So, yeah.  We had 16 people signed up and out of the 16 people only three actually went to the whole process of actually being out there and standing around and be happy.
      Well, another thing you have to do besides all the paperwork is a promotion.  You want to make people known.  So, everyone was basically doing a big sweatshop.  Sending out paperwork.  We sent I think 100 of these boxes all the way to Germany.  We sent them all the way around the world.  Every hacker camp basically got one of these boxes.  And we got a lot of feedback from them.  And when you want to promote yourself, make sure that people know where you are, when the  when you start and also when the ticket sale starts because I heard people saying, yeah, well, I know you were doing a ticket sale, but you were already sold out when I heard about it.
      And one time  at one moment, when everything starts falling together, you start to go more and more  you start  you basically start to feel stressed out.  And the thing is, you will see that the event will basically  you'll get some sort of momentum going.  The more you go into that event, the more you will see the things that you are going to do, the closer you get, the more stressful you get.  Because if something goes wrong, then deadlines are coming closer and closer.  We're happy we got badges all the way from China.  Someone flew all the way to China just to make sure they were actually being made.
      The teams were shown results.  This picture was from the last meeting that we had.  They had a really nice design.  They had everyone was showing off the badges.  And the badge prototypes.  Decoration was showing these lights.  Where eventually later seemed to be working until the  until everything got wet.  And we also had merchandise coming up.  So, we could have a final check on what's going down.  What has to be done.
      And the good thing about it is the closer you get to the event, the more cohesive the teams are gonna be.  So, when I ask, for example, to the info desk, well, I want to have a map with all the villages listed on it, within an hour I got the map with all the villages listed on it.  When I asked the badge team, can you give me this and this application, they said, okay, I will give it.
      In an hour, I got it.  So, the teams were really focused on their specific job, their specific task.  And things were basically going well.  And we were doing great.  And then the bikeshedding happens.  This is one of the many bikesheds that I had to deal with as a team lead.  This thing is a sonar.  Originally, they wanted to import the sonar all the way from Finland with basically building the whole thing down  tearing the whole thing down in Finland, building it up and five days later get it back out.  Logistics didn't like it too much.  That meant too much trouble for them and it meant they would waste various resources on it.
      So, the thing from Finland got scrapped.  Then they wanted to built a huge tent and basically build a sonar out of it.  Safety didn't like it so much.  They were afraid if the tent caught on fire, yeah, well, you have people inside a burning tent and they were not fireproof, and they had to be registered with the permits.  So, yeah.  Got scrapped that one too.
      And they said, well, you know, we're going bring our own sonar, but it has charcoal in it.  Well, we had an issue with charcoal on the field.  You only were allowed to use gas or electricity.  So, yeah.  Safety sent the message again.  Then came back to lighting, then back to me.  And I had to say, sorry, guys, you're not going to do it.  But there was an alternative.
      Somehow the guys finally managed to get the sonar on the field which they promised the safety guy, you know, here is the sonar.  You can use it for the night.  We don't talk about it.  This sonar was rented out.  It was on electricity.  And, yeah.  Things still happened anyway.  It doesn't matter how good  how many bikeshed you do, still if you want to have it done, you will have it done.
      And another thing that we had to do a lot of bikeshedding was the coin vendors.  The coin machine we got basically our second  no, our treasurer got a message five days before the event that the coin vendor would not supply the coin machines because they feared that someone would enter the machine, hack them and then they could not use the machine on other festivals anymore.
      So, basically it meant a lot of bikeshedding from them and back in messages, why are you not supplying?  We paid for it.  And then our  then our treasurer said well, you know, screw it.  I cannot deal with  with vendors that don't want to have a free test of their stuff.  So, we get  we can just get another supplier.  Got a lengthy email, send it out.  And, yeah.  Never got the reply of it again.
      So, the competitor delivered.  We had one key.  Then we got the machine.  We got around 25 keys when the machine left  left the site.  So, apparently someone was really busy with cloning keys.  Although it was a good machine, we had a problem with it.  Originally, we wanted to have red and blue coins for the nominations.  But the machine couldn't handle the red coins and was spitting out basically all its  its stuff.  So, we had  suddenly had red coins distributed everywhere and then we had to change it to not a coin.
      The vendor didn't like to have all those  they didn't have those coins.  They had to make them just for us.  We wanted 150K.  In the end we got 100K yellow coins.  And then after the first opening talk, I was sitting behind the machine constantly refilling the machine because it could only handle 2,000 coins and everyone wanted to drink and have food and have a happy time.  So, yeah.  There was basically the machine broke down twice during the day one because it just simply could not handle all the  all the coins being sent through there.
      After that we found out the coins were static.  So, they clung to each other.  So, every three to four hours someone rang the doorbell, I had to go out, give it a good knock on the machine, spray some lubricant in there and then the thing would get rolling again.
      And when I was behind the machine, people would use the machine and then stick their hands in because they were afraid that the coins would fall out.  And then I tickled them.  And, yeah.  Sometimes it got their really  and then you hear, oh!  The machine is alive!  And, yeah.  It worked pretty well.  And then sometimes they came through the back and security said, oh, you cannot enter.  Someone is busy down there.  And then they're like, oh, yeah.  Hm.  That's what happens.  It's just not the machine is alive.  No, there's a human in there refilling the machine.
      When you get to D Day, there's a lot of things to do and also a lot of things you don't expect.  For us, the thing we didn't expect was our  the family village totally under the water.  We had a lot of thought about it.  Eventually we said to the other fields, and we put all the family field to the other fields.  And left the family advantage basically untouched.  In the end it was a good sign because the other people would mingle in with the rest of the villages.  And on the other hand, we had to do some, you know, shuffling of things all the way around.  The pictures that I have here, they're pictures that I took during the buildup phase.  Which was basically almost day minus 6 or day minus 7 when we just arrived there.
      And I have to say the picture on the right, that's the only one with a pool that basically had the full gear on them.  The rest were just wearing suits and steel boots.  Some other pictures, I got from  from the safety crew.  They bought a lot of  because we were in a harbor, and the harbor team had to supply from the municipality vests, swimming vests or some equipment for those that couldn't swim.  So, they bought like  I think they bought the whole store out.  Just to make sure that the  that they got enough stock.
      We had  needed to have special safety vests for during the night when we're directing traffic.  Every stage needed to have some sort of loud speaker.  We had a lot of megaphones.  The municipality required that we had 300 meters of fire hose.  We bought it.
      We had a special sticker, move your car or it will end up in a ditch.  I don't think we did it, actually.  But I know that logistics was very happy to do it to some old cars.  In the middle, police came.  They saw all the nice funny things on our buggies.  And they wanted some.  Unfortunately, they ran out.  And this was the only thing they had left.  During event itself, wonderful event, I have not seen everything.  Most of the time I was just behind the stage.  These pictures are mostly memories that they put on Flickr.
      The one, from what I heard, think basically tried to DDoS  they tried to DDoS the machine just to get the picture on the screen.  There's a nice write up about it.  The SHA logo, they did a fantastic job on getting everything on time.  And especially on some very short time where we sometimes thought, you know, this is not gonna happen and it still happened anyway.  The aftermath.  Yeah.  After you have the event, you know, you have  you have to do the cleanup of everything.  When I started  when I started walking around, first thing I did was go to the pup tent and go to my clicker.  I was wondering how many mosquitoes and vermin they destroyed in the things.  And they said around 4800.  What was it again?  4800 wasps that were exterminated through their  yeah.  Through the electronic disposal units.
      We had got a lot of fantastic positive press.  I talked with Jenny from Hacker Day and she said, well, you know, I love how you run the event.  Show us this year how you actually did it.  Because people have to know how these camps are actually made.  So, that's how we got here.  We had a great event.  No real difficulties after with people burning out.  We had some things  people that were like borderline.  But I have to be happy that I had a really great team working on that event.
      And for the rest, yeah.  I haven't seen any talk.  All I did was just walk around.  Make sure that things were delivered on time.  Make sure that people were going around.  You don't have any moment during your whole event to watch something.  I haven't seen John T. around.  I've seen Russ running and screaming and yelling and making sure that things were delivered.  And, yeah.  You don't see anything unless you go on YouTube or something like that.
      I did meet a lot of people.  A lot of people when I was just walking from A to B or when I had to do something else.  You meet a lot of crew.  And you meet a lot of people.  You make some new friends.  This year, for example, I'm running the postal office with some people from England.  After the event basically, yeah.  You do a lot of things and you think, well, you know, you just pack it up and ship it out.  You tear it down completely and after that the grass is green.  And nobody will ever notice that there was an event at all.
      But things don't always go to plan when  especially after an event.  You still, as a secretary, you still got things to do.  This was a nice picture that I had taken from the logistics teams.  They said well, you know, return everything.  Because we want  they kept track of what went out and what went back in.
      And they said, no hoarding, we were limited on equipment.  We did everything, even duct tape.  Well, no.  Still everything  this is the list of things that still got messing.  Around 40 bags of tie wraps, 17 rolls of duct tape which people just ignored the sign and just got rid of it.  Some radios.  The carts.  So, basically for the whole camp, never got returned, umbrellas, markers.  Lost and found items.  And one of the things was my inflatable unicorn that I brought there.  It was like a  gigantic 2-meter big unicorn and I gave it to Daco and later it disappeared and most likely they got it because I was looking at Hacker Day and then suddenly I saw this.
      So, apparently someone found it  found it in the deco shed and transferred it to the next Congress.  And Hacker Day made a nice picture out of it.  And I don't know where it is now.  But I do know that the police actually liked these things so much that we got a picture last, I think two or three weeks.  This one.  Where they actually got a hold of 35 unicorns  inflatable unicorns.  So, next time I'll  when we talk with the police I'll ask if they still need some more unicorns on their  on the car.
      Yeah.  Besides that, after the event, things still have to be done by  by the  by the foundation.  We got three speeding tickets.  All from the same guy who sped around.  I think it was 57 in a place where he was supposed to be driving 50.  We got three tickets off that.  Unfortunately, we don't know who it was.  But if you know  if you have seen yourself in the mirror with the white flash, please do come.  We'll make arrangements for that.
      We've got a lot of the Spammers.  Mostly tepee tents, promotional materials.  I had to  I had to ask not to shut down the info desk mailing list because it was just getting totally spent with all kinds of commercial items that I could think of.  We had our taxes.  When you do an event like this, you always have to have taxes.  And luckily enough, most of the taxes they got back from this here.  So, we made a bit of  yeah.  Let me say, we could get our money back out of it.
      We had lost and found.  People always losing stuff.  Most of the things got returned.  There were a couple things that we couldn't find.  Unfortunately, we don't know where they went.  And I always say someone dropped in the Tardis and went off with it.  You always get  when you're planning an event like this, always get some overstock.  Things that won't get sold.  We had these Tshirts.  We had all kinds of sizes.  You know, we were making a lot of them.  So that we could supply them.  I still have  still getting some overstock from  from the people that say, well, you know, we have a badge that's broken, or we have something and  yeah.  We're lucky this year we basically got rid of everything.
      And also, most of the things were donations to the hackerspaces.  I know some hackerspaces, especially all hackerspaces in Holland currently have a full  I can say a full back full of plastic cups.  So, nobody was ever in shortness of cups.
      All the things that we had in logistics, we stored them, so they went all as the nations do, all the hackerspaces.  We could fund a new hackerspace with all kinds of equipment just to get them up.
      Well, I learned a lot of things with it.  The main things I put over here.  Some of the things is like have a good supportive family, friends, and other things.  Don't try to overdo yourself.  And communication is key.  Things I should improve on.  This is  well, it's basically a couple of things that people said to me, yeah, well, I should do it for the next event.  And I will take that  that the thing goes into consideration for the next event.  And, yeah.  Well, the question I get asked is, would I ever do it again?
      And when I  when people will ask me that question, I say, yes.  And I hope you also do the same thing.  Thanks.
      [ Applause ]
      >> The next talk is coming up soon, so questions will be in the bar later.  Thank you.  Thank you very much.
      [ Applause ]

