      Next up:  How to Climb a Mountain.
      
      Andy Vine
      
      >> The next talk of the day is starting now.  Hello?  Okay.  The next talk is starting now, Andy Vine here to tell us how to climb a mountain.
      [ Applause ]
      ANDY: Hey, can everyone hear me all right?  Yep.  Good, good.  Okay.  So, I'm going to talk about two climbing expeditions I have on.  One in 2001 to India and the other was actually straight after the last EMF 2016.  We went to Kyrgyzstan.  First, how I got into this.  A lot of people come into mountain climbing from rock climbing or hill climbing.  I do a combination of both.  Did a lot of walking.  I studied in Devon, I participated in the event there is.  And at university I started rock climbing.
      And at the end of my first year, the club I was involved in was going to the Alps, the region that is my favorite.  And climbed up to 4,000 meters.  And then at the end of my degree, because I have been to the Alps every year during my degree, I started thinking about an expedition.  And that was made easier that there were people in the club that I was a member of that had done it before.  That's kind of how most people get into this sort of thing.  They join a club and sort of follow that career path.
      So, a friend from the club suggested India because the research was relatively easy and the infrastructure in India is a bit better than the rest of the Himalayas.  Okay, so, the reason that the research is a bit easier is because the Alpine Club, based in London, have a long line database of all the mountains in the Himalayas that have been climbed, hopefully.  All the ones they have records of.  And they really do have extensive records and they have a big library.
      So, you're able to search your sort of latitude and longitudinal square and find the climbs reported in various alpine journals.  And we were looking at this area and found that the mountains on this side of the river, this CB range, the CB and then a number, they had all been climbed and reported.  So, we had an idea of what conditions were like in the region.  But on the other side of the river, there was nothing at all in this whole big area that had been climbed and only this one mountain that had a name, Tangney, and on the previous map we had, it was the highest in the region.  But on this map, it's not quite.  There's peak 6250, unnamed peak, that was a little bit higher.  This was the best map we managed to get hold of.  Remember, this was back in 2001.  We tried to get hold of a satellite images and couldn't.  Went to the RGS, and their maps were based on the 1800s survey of India by the British.  So, this map, which is better than the map that they had at the Indian mountaineering foundation in Delhi, we got out of Covent Garden.  And you find there are people going to interesting and exciting places that pass through.  You never know where they're going.  I like it.
      And you used to be able to go in and pull out of a drawer a map of somewhere where nobody's ever climbed before.  So, yeah, we resolved to climb Tangney, be being the only named peak in the area and called it the Tangney expedition.  This is us trekking in.  We started on a pretty precarious bus journey, actually, with big precipices with the tires right on the edge of the road.  But the roads deteriorated into paths.  We had arranged to have ponies carry all our stuff.  There was quite a lot of stuff as well.  The Himalayas, you tend to end up with a bit of an entourage like a cook and various people to help you out.  It's a bit of an unusual way to climb if you're used to the Alps.  There's just two of you there, generally.
      Okay.  Just going to say a bit about glaciers now.  Forgive me if you already know this, but I think it's worth saying.  So, obviously when the snow falls but it isn't cold enough to melt it, it compacts into a big ice sheet and then the ice sheet flows down the mountain.  It acts as a viscous liquid.  Moving very slowly down the mountain.  But when it goes over a bulge, the top goes into tensions and causes tracks, big cracks, crevasses.  It's important if you're on a glacier covered in snow you stay roped up because the snow forms bridges which sometimes don't give way, but in the afternoon, when it gets hotter, the bridges can give way and you can fall into the crevasse.  You have to know how to get out and make sure you're roped up whenever you're on a wet glacier.  It matters less when you're on one like this in Kyrgyzstan.  So, it is Tangney, we made it there.  We actually did several different glaciers on the way there and this was the best approach.  The line up the ridge here, around here to the coal here.  And then up here over several rock steps and then to the summit.  And that's about 500 meters of height gain from our camp which was down here.
      So, this is us high on the ridge.  Our tent is just that little dot there.  And so, we come up this ridge, around the amphitheater, and you can see that the glacier is pretty impassible as well.  The glaciers can be quite dangerous like this, bits can break up and ice can come down the mountain at you.  It's well worth avoiding them.  This is  he didn't come with us from England.  Because in India you have to pay to climb mountains.
      So, he's a representative of the Indian government who is there to make sure that we only climb what we said we would climb and that we would pay for everything that we climbed.  Normally they send a guy from the military, but we were really lucky.  He had his own trekking firm and he was a climber just like us.  We had a very similar mindset and got on really well.  So, he's climbing the mountain with me.  And we got to the top in the end.
      And so, here's the view from the top.  Obviously, this is a view no one's ever seen before apart from us.  At the time, anyway.  And here are the CB mountains from over the other side.  They're bigger mountains.  So, the people are more interested in climbing them.  That's why that side's already been climbed.
      And this is me on the summit.  By pure coincidence on my 23rd birthday.  So, great way to spend my birthday.  Okay.  Quick word about altitude.  So, I think most people know that the air gets thinner the higher you go.  But what's worth pointing out is there's a really big effect.  So, this is a graph of altitude versus atmospheric pressure.  And you can also see this as a graph of oxygen concentration because when you're down at sea level it's 100%.  But obviously as it drops, the oxygen concentration compared to the baseline of what you're used to drops as well.
      So, on the summit of Snowden, about a thousand meters, you have lost about 10% of the oxygen that you're normally used to.  On Mont Blanc, 55% of what you're used to.  And on Tangney, 6111, down to well under 50%.  Probably like 47, 46%.  And you really feel that.  It basically means you've got to rest a lot.  You take a few steps and have a rest.  Breathe heavily.  Obviously, your body adapts to it, so, you breathe more deeply, and your body produces more blood cells which you have to be aware that can possibly be a risk of clotting.
      And also, you got to be aware to acclimatize very slowly which is why we did quite a long walk for this trip.  But we didn't need to walk but getting exercise over 3500 meter was really useful in making sure we were really well acclimatized on the day.
      This is the other mountain that was climbed on that trip.  I didn't climb this one, it was the other guys on the team.  So, Alan Gere, John Ellis and Steve Jolly summited.  They went from our camp here all the way up the glacier.  And then all the way up this ridge which they were hoping would be a nice, snowy ridge.  But turned out to be actually pretty rocky and quite difficult climbing.  They spent 20 hours going from the tent up, down, back again.  We were a bit worried about them.  We were quite pleased to see head torches coming down the glacier quite late at night.  But it all worked out in the end.
      So, at the end of the trip we made this map.  It's pretty rough.  But you can  you can see the important bits.  This is where we made our base camp.  Then we carried  no.  Then we carried loads up to advanced base camp and then we req'd these glaciers and Tangney on the south.  And we identified some passes as well.
      So, this is based on the map that you saw earlier, the ridgeline map.  The green is ridgelines.  But with a little bit more information from us.  So, that's India.  And now I'm going to talk about our Kyrgyzstan trip.  This was from my partner, Miles.  He thought mountaineering was like math research.  Unfortunately, I'm not a mathematician, don't ask me any questions about maths.  So, I said, okay.  I'll tell you some of his thoughts and some of it I can back up with my own experiences in engineering research.
      So, some questions that you can get quite a lot, particularly if you're involved with maths is, do you really do this for fun?  And secondly, is it really possible to do new stuff?  So, yeah, there were plenty of unclimbed mountains left in the world.  And if you follow this a little bit more, you are aware of the people at the cutting edge.  The famous mountaineers doing the really difficult route.  But actually, there are plenty of mountains and plenty of interesting maths that are welltrained, mere mortal can approach and perhaps find solutions to.
      So, once you have decided this is a thing that's possible and you want to do it, then you need to pick a general area.  In this case, we picked Kyrgyzstan.  This is the tail end of the Himalayas, borders Chinas and Kazakhstan.  And it's good because there are no peak fees and it's quite welldeveloped as well.  And there are lots of unclimbed mountains that are not too difficult.  The research is really hard.  Light research in other subjects.  You have to start with the literature review.  And in this case, it's all in Russian.
      So, this is a bit of a barrier.  But we did the best we could.  And like other areas of research, it's kind of hard work.  There's a lot of inconsistent notation.  Same names for different things, different names for the same things.  And what was actually done can be quite poorly reported and it's quite difficult.  But eventually we came up with an area that we were really interested in.  The Kyndik Valley and glacier and identified some mountains we wanted to do.  This one right at the head of the valley, objective A.  This one off to the side, ObjectiveC.  Objective D is there.  Objective B is there.  Our base camp's way back here.  And we're planning to carry loads about 6 kilometers up to the glacier and make a camp there.  And from there we could do all the other mountains.  Once you have decided what to do, you have to raise money.  Research.  Thanks to the sponsors, high fie sports nutrition, some provided equipment and money.  The mountain risk foundation is really worth having because they give you a lot of credibility if you can get approval and funding from them.  And also help publicize you after the trip.
      So, this is a bit I did.  After you have done all that, then you want to get the snacks and supplies in.  Where there is research or mountaineering.  This is the good thing about Kyrgyzstan, this is a super market, it looks light a regular supermarket.  It makes shopping really easy.  There's no complication involved and it kind of blew my mind because a couple of days from this supermarket there are people herding sheep, nomads living in yurts.  This is why Kyrgyzstan is brilliant.  A quick thing about what we eat.
      We carry a lot of dense, calorie rich food.  It has to be light.  And Thai curries.  You can buy them, and get a block of coconut milk, which looks like a bar of soap.  Cook it down, and with local dried mushrooms and dried meat, that's a tasty meal.  Get a lot of calories in you.  And cook it with pasta, parmesan is good, loads of fat and protein.  And salami.  We were a bit sick of it by the end of the trip, but it kept us alive and kept us moving.
      So, next thing you obviously have to do is plenty of training.  So, again, like other areas  like other research into new areas, you find  you have to practice solutions to known problems.  So, climbs other people have done before.  So, that's in the Dolomites, or in Scotland, which is definitely cold enough to freeze your beard.
      And after all that, you can get to Kyrgyzstan and get into the mountains.  Yes, this was the first sort of  when we got out of the van, it had been raining.  The rain cleared.  Got out of the 4x4 and had a good look around.  It was really amazing.
      This is Nikolai and Sergey, Nikolai was the driver and Sergey was the translator.  So, when you get into the problem, you'll probably find other people already working the field and it's really handy to have someone translate one, what it is they're saying and make some introductions.  That was Sergey's job.  I quite like the horse getting involved in this conversation.
      And at any stage in this, you may find something you really weren't expecting at all.  Maybe camels.  Yep.  That's a camel.  I wasn't expecting to see camels.  I don't know if you were expecting to see camels on the top of a mountain.  But there were camels.  So, this is Beck who helped us out.  So, we're talking to those guys because we wanted some help get our kits up the valley and these shepherds have ponies so we're helping they can help us.  Beck looks after 502 sheep which he counts into the sheep pen every evening.  And this is his mate who helps him out with the sheep  with the shepherding.
      They live here.  This is the  the hut that Beck's grandfather built.  And before that he lived in a Yurt.  And it was really nice and cozy inside with this stove that was fueled on animal dung.  And didn't smell weird or anything.  It was great.  Really cozy, sort of traditional felt on the floor.  And their top tip was, if you have black tea and jam, you can make fruit tea by adding them together.  Brilliant.
      So, the next day we set off for the Kyndik valley.  There were quite a lot of climbing areas have coolsounding hard names like Death Valley or the Nameless Valley.  We're walking along with Beck and the horses.  You know what Kyndik is?  It's this.  So, we've planned a trip to the valley of the belly button.  Oh, well.
      So, as we went, the ground got harder and we ended up leaving the horses.  Miles had some difficulty establishing a rapport with his horse because his horse just wanted to eat grass.  But eventually we made it to a point where the horses couldn't go any further and we made our base camp.  So, our tents here.  The reason I'm so excited is because I've worked out a way to stop all the marmots eating the food by hanging it off of the big rocks of the panniers that we've brought for the horses.
      So, there was a company Kyrgyzstan, we said no to the mess tent and the folding chairs and the cutlery and crockery.  We would bring our own, it's all lightweight.  But they insisted that we take a stove from them.  So, they supplied us with this stove.  Which is absolutely huge.  And has this massive gas bottle.  My mountaineering stove is 125 grams and made of titanium.  They gave us this.  And on top of all that, this ring we couldn't turn on, and this we couldn't turn it off.  We had to turn it off with the gas bottle.  We felt pretty silly.  We managed.  The stove worked in the end.
      And we carried quite a lot of kit up the valley and made our camp here just before the end of the glacier.  And all the way up we could see this big mountain here which is objective A.  And incidentally, this is the tent that the tent man  that the tent man stayed in when we came together.  Yeah, we didn't see a lot of vegetation or animals.  We saw some marmots.  We didn't see any Ibex.  But this is an ibex skull.  The big, curved horns.
      All right.  The climbing begins.  This is objective C.  Started from the base camp, went across, up the glacier, through some crevasse fields and up the ridge.  And along the ridge to the summit, passed two or three places that could be the summit, and saw a higher one.  Eventually we got there.  That's good.  Once you have one mountain done and you can say it's a success and all your sponsors will be happy, hopefully.
      And so, Miles said we should get some promotional shots for the sponsors.  He didn't think I was taking this seriously enough but actually the sponsors really liked this photo when we Tweeted it.
      Okay, so, like we said before, we can get satellite photos before.  Well, I think this is have moved on because now Google Maps is amazing.  So, this picture here is actually from Google Earth.  And this is the real picture when we were there.  And you can see it matches up pretty well.  You have this big snow face and this big Triangular face, this here matches this.  The problem is the resolution.  Because we were hoping to go up here and along this ridge.  And you can see from the reality one that it's a really pointy serrated, jagged ridge.  And that would take us far too long.  Just more difficult than we really wanted to do on this trip.  It didn't show up at all on the Google Maps image.  So, I guess that's a way that climbing is like research as well.  You find things you just didn't expect.  Sometimes things are harder than you thought.
      Likewise, we were hoping that we would be able to  so, okay, next mountain, objective A.  We were hoping to be able to come up this easy ridge and climb over this rock bulge and then make it to the summit.  But this turned out to be a bit more difficult as well.  So, this picture of Miles on the ridge.  He climbed further on from here up some quite poor snow.  He made it to the top of that rock bulge I just showed you, but we couldn't get any further without committing to pulling the rope down.  We would be committed to finding another way down.  We didn't fancy that.  Since the weather was coming in as well, we retreated off it to try to find a better way.
      And setback like that should be treated with food and tea.  Fruit tea, yeah?  Why not.  If you've got some jam.  It's okay.  This was our successful approach on objective A.  We were a bit concerned about this steep face here.  But it turned out to be fine.  So, up the glacier, up that face and then it's just a really nice ridge walk on the snow all the way up to the summit.  So, yeah, sometimes you try an approach, it doesn't work out.  You have to go back to the start.  And then when you try the right approach, everything seems so much easier.
      That's me on the summit.  Obviously, we had to take turns taking pictures on the summit.  But there's a selfie of us both there.  Okay.  So, the last climbing day we decided to have a go at this peak, just before the jagged ridge.  The jagged ridge goes off behind this.  So, this is the highest point we could get to without committing to the unpleasant ridge.  We came up with the glacier here and went up this ridge which is probably a little bit longer than it looks.  This is a bit fore shortened.  And made it to the summit.  That was really good.  Then we came back down.  We came back down to the coal here.  So, you have to get up really earlier because the snow is frozen then.  And it makes it a lot easier if the snow is frozen.  Mainly because rocks won't be coming down the mountain at you.
      So, we got back to this point, it was about 9:00.  But Miles thought we should do something else because he felt like he wanted to do something with his day.  Miles, you just made the summit of a previously unclimbed mountain and you're saying you want to do something with your day.  Okay.  We'll go on the ridge.  So, we went all the way along here.  This turned out to be a really nice ridge walk.  You get these pillars along the ridge that are sometimes called jandams, and the first one was white marble and the next one of the black.  And then we got to this bit where it was weird bands on the ground.  It looks like we raked this out, but I promise, it was like this when we got there.  I have never seen anything like this.  If someone could explain what's going on here.  It's really interesting.  But I really like it.
      And so, from  once you get to the end from your new perspective you'll be able to see other objectives that look really interesting and you might want to try.  All of the mountains in this picture haven't been climbed as far as we know.  This is the Arroyo Valley, the one just over from us that we're looking in from that ridge.  And I didn't want to ask what Arroyo means.
      And this mountain looks particularly nice and accessible with all the multicolored scree again but looks like it wouldn't be too hard.  So, on the day we arranged, Beck showed up with his horses and the horse pulled this weird face and I put it in the presentation.  That worked out really well.  Beck took us home.  At that point, you want to crack on with the new objectives.  But you can't do that because you have to write it up.  And this is your opportunity to correct all those horrible reports which weren't clear enough.  And you have to put everything down as clearly as you possibly can.
      So that other people who come to this area after you will be able to have a more pleasant time when they do their research.  And it's normally this point when you find the reference that would have been helpful at the start.  This is a big name in Russian climbing, he used to be a master of climbing in the soviet days.  And he put this map together for us which is really handy, but at the end of the expedition.  So, you can see we've added in the mountains that we climbed.  But, I mean, you know, if you're planning a trip to this area, this is what you want  this is what you want to see.  And he was able to search the Russian Internet as well because he's Russian.  Okay.  That's nearly the end.
      But I've got five tips for camping in a small tent.  I've realized actually camping in a big tent is a slightly different set of problems.  But, yeah.  If you're camping in a small tent, this is what I recommend.  Number one, at night, use a head torch, but dip it down when you talk to people.  Just like car headlights otherwise they get a light in their face.  Number two, when cooking, use a pan with fins on the bottom, it's cooking faster.  And use a windshield.  Make one out of the catering trays.  Don't buy one.  No one does that.  Use a loft for watching TV.  The top of the tent, a bit of mesh fabric.  You can put stuff up there to dry, or put your phone up there and lay back and watch Dr. Who at base camp like we did.  Bring ten lighters, lighters always go wrong.  The further from home, the more important.  And camping somewhere rocky, don't worry about the tent pegs into the rocky ground.  Find big rocks, wrap the guy lines around them, and peg the tent out that way.  No problem at all.  That's it.
      [ Applause ]
      >> We do have time for some questions.
      AUDIENCE: So, what sort of particular kind of skills would you say are particularly important I know coming from small expeditions maybe a little bit in Scotland to going on a more significant expedition like that, what would you say is kind of most important that you kind of built up in that process?
      ANDY: Am I still mic'd?  Yeah.  I would say it's important to get somewhere where there are some glaciers.  I would recommend going to the Alps if you're familiar with Scotland.  The weather's a lot better.  You'll have a great time.  But, yeah, go to the Alps with someone who knows what they're doing.  Once you've had three seasons in the Alps or so, then you're good to look at the greater ranges.  And Kyrgyzstan is good for a first expedition.  It was Miles first expedition.  And it was not the technical difficulties.  Is that  great, thanks. 
      >> Okay.  Another round of applause.  More questions.
      AUDIENCE: Hi, I was just wondering what you used in terms of safety equipment or if you just didn't bother.
      ANDY: That's a good question.  Yeah, we hired sat phones from ITMC.  Never hire a sat phone.  Ever.  Don't anyone ever do this.  What we need to do is buy the sat phone and then sell it after the expedition.  That give us a chance to get really used to.  Make sure you have the right charging cable  which we didn't.  And pick sure you can actually use it.  It was a real problem.  We ended up sort of on text only and having to really conserve the battery just in case we really needed it to call for help.  So, yeah.  We did use some probably not good enough sat phones.  So, I recommend buying one.
      AUDIENCE: Did you get to name the mountains?
      ANDY: Yes.  So, the way  kind of.  The way you name a mountain is you start using a name for an unnamed mountain and hope it catches on.  So, the second one we claimed in India, that means ocean in the local Hindu.  And that's because it was this sort of rippling ridge all the way up.  The ones, objective A, there was crow peak because there were bird footprints on the summit.  Objective B, I can't  we didn't climb that one.  Objective C, I can't remember.  But the last two were camel peak and marmot peak.  The things we had seen on the way.
      >> Anymore?
      AUDIENCE: How much weight did you lose by doing this?
      ANDY: We didn't actually lose that much weight on the Kyrgyzstan.  In India, we lost weight.  The water proof trousers I bought.  They arrived the day before, and they were a bit tight.  By the end of the trip, nice and comfy.  The other trip, we were fine until we got off the mountain and then we  we went to this restaurant where you had a big sort of pie thing with a pasty yurt over the top.  And that made Miles really, really ill and he lost a huge amount of weight at the end of the trip.  But, yeah, we kept on all right.  Mostly on the Kyrgyzstan trip.  That was good.
      AUDIENCE: What are you going to climb next?
      ANDY: I'm not quite sure.  And now is a good time to be thinking about it because they have their deadline by the end of the year.  So, I'm going to work out if I'm going to do another big trip or not.  There is a mountain in Nepal which I really like the look of.  We're calling it nice ridge at the moment because it's steep on three sides and then it has a really nice ridge going up to the top.
      I think that would be a fantastic climb.  But that's just an aspiration at the moment.
      >> Cool.  So, thank you.  Thank you very much.
      [ Applause ]

