      Making music in the free and opensource world
      
      Gavan Fantom
      
      >> Hello, everyone.  Welcome back to stage B.  Just before we get started, remember that you can always sign up.  We are keen to have you.  If you would like to learn a little bit about the AV desk and all that stuff, join us at the back and take part in volunteering.  However, we're going to kick off the next talk with Gavan and he's going to take us on a musical journey.  Give him a round of applause.
      [ Applause ]
      GAVAN: Thank you very much.  My name's Gavan Fantom.  I'm going to talk about making music in the free and open source world.  I have been making music not professionally, but for fun for quite a lot of my life.  And I'm also interested in free and open source software and the whole kind of  thing as well.  So, obviously today we're going to talk about a bit of a crossover with that.  Music technology is a thing that has been quite important in music for a few decades now.  And there's an accidental mouse click.  There we go.
      There's a lot of music that has been created digitally.  There's also a lot of software that is not commercial.  So, while a lot of the people who are making music commercially or even noncommercially are using commercial software, what I want to talk about talk to you about today is software that's available that's free and open source.  Now, I'm using Linux here.  But that doesn't mean that Linux is the only option for free and open source software for music.  Some of the software I'm going to talk about runs on other operating systems, and there are free and open source for other operating systems as well.
      I need to give a bit of a caveat here.  I'm gonna be talking about a few different pieces of software.  I do not have time in one slot to talk about all the bits I would like to talk about.  And if anybody here has used any free and open source software to make music, there is a significant chance that your favorite piece of software will not be mentioned today.  That doesn't mean that I think you're using the wrong software.  It doesn't mean the software sucks.  It's just there's only so much I can talk about in one go.  Right.  So, the first thing I want to kick off with is something that you might not immediately associate with making music.  which is DJ software.
      Now, I am not a DJ.  I do not have mad DJ skills.  Don't expect too much from this.  I want to give a quick overview of this piece of software.  And this software is called Mixxx.  That's with a triple X.  It's not porn, I promise.  And to demonstrate this what I've done is I've taken a few pieces of music from the free music archive under creative commons license and I'm going to use a couple of pieces by an artist, Time Crawler 82 to satisfy the attribution license.  So, Mixxx is just a simulation of a couple of DJ decks.  And I should have found a better surface for this mouse.  Right.  Here we go.  What we're going to do is just play some music and then I'm going to take you through a really, really simple cross favor.  That might go wrong.  I've never done this on stage before.
      Here we have a piece of music running, it's a few minutes until the end of the music.  I'm not going to play the whole piece.  We are going skip into it.  While that's going on, I'm going load up the next piece.  And I can have a listen to this.  This is where it all goes horribly wrong.  If I press play on this side, I take the headphone button, which means  you won't hear any of it, hopefully.  And when I put on my secret headphones  that doesn't really work.  But what I can determine is where I actually want to stop this.  In this particular case, it's going right in the beginning and it's  now, you'll notice there's some beat markers going across.
      This does actually try and find where the beats are to synchronize them.  It's going slightly wrong occasionally.  For this piece, for the other piece, it's slightly wrong.  But there's a button that will sync and up it mess with the hardware for you.  At this point, we skip on to the end of the piece, otherwise we'll be here all day.
      ¶ ¶
      and you can start the other one, which is hopefully in sync.  Not quite, but it will do.  And then you start a nice little cross wave.  At this point we can get on with the next track and spend the next hour or two making music.  Hopefully by the time you've got an hour into it, you are a bit better than I am now.  And throwing the mixes and people can carry on with the dancing.  Right.
      So, that's DJ'ing.  Done.  And we're going to move on to some more software now.  We have the case for something completely different.  And for the rest of the software in this talk, what I'm going to be doing is doing a little piece of music in each bit of software.  And at the end, we'll have some fun combining them into something a bit ridiculous.
      So, here we go.  If  if you think of making music, there are a lot of different things you might think of.  And before about 30 years ago, you probably thought of picking up a musical instrument and playing it like a  maybe not picking up, but a piano or a clarinet or a guitar or something like that.
      And if you're doing that, you're probably quite interested in this bit of software.  This is Music.  This is what's called a notation editor.  This allows you to write the sort of music that you can then read.  Triple clicking and talking at the same time is not the easiest thing to do.  So, this is the sort of blank sheet music that you might find if you're playing a piano.  And we can add a few notes.  And you might hear them pretty quietly in the background as I add them.
      Okay.  That was a very simple fraction of a tune.  It's not quite what I was going for, but we'll go with that.  And then you can play it back.  Now, at this point, I mean, by at this point I mean, by the time you've spent a little bit more time of and maybe turned it into this.  You can play it back.
      [piano playing]
      At this point, you have two choices.  One is to print out and play it.  And the other one is to export it into some other format and put it into some other piece of music software.  That's the one that I'm gonna do.  But if you're a classicallytrained musician, your music technology process probably ends here with the print button and you go to the printer and picking up the piece of paper and spending the next few hours playing it and recording it.
      We'll come back to this melody later.  I have exported it so I'm not going to show you that process.  Going with the theme of completely changing from one type of music to another, let's talk about drums.  Obviously, a bit of piano music doesn't normally have drums in it, but we can do to electronic music.  And if you have hung around if a music shop and played with their synthesizers, you would have done this.  I know I did.
      But I'm going to choose a slightly different sound here.  I'm going to go a little bit more electronic.  This is the TR88 kit, quite popular in dance music.  And we can make a really simple drum pattern.  What do you think the simplest drum pattern we can possibly make is?  I can see somebody in the back signing exactly where I am going.  And it is this.  One, two, three, four.  And it sounds like this.  You know, let's make it a bit faster.  [drum beats]
      Make another pattern.  We can start it with the same thing.  And the next simplest thing we could possibly do is this.  You can do a lot more complicated things, but this is good enough for quite a lot of EDM and other things.  So, we'll go with that.
      And you can combine the two.  Rather than just dealing with the pattern, you can put patterns in different places and make a song.  So, we can have four bars of this.  Followed by four bars of this.
      [drums beating]
      So, I'm sold, right?  We're making  we're making music already, right?  Okay.  Let's  let's do something with it.  The next bit of software I want to talk about is a workstation called Ardour.  It's not the only one, but I really like this one.  And it's extremely capable.  So, digital day workstation is really the workhorse for recording studios, for synthesis, for all sorts of other bits and pieces.  And let's get rid of this one.  We don't need this yet.
      So, where I am going with this is that we can transfer something that we've done in Hydrogen at our machine into Ardour.  We can make a track.  We make sure that Hydrogen is connected to Ardour.  This is using a piece of software called Jack which does pretty much what the name suggests, it allows you to plug things into other things.  In this case, the output from our drum synthesizer to the input of the drum's track in Ardour.  And we're just going to make sure nothing else plays while we do this.  And excuse the sound for a moment.  We're going to record this and off we go.
      So, right now we're converting this  this drum track into just a  an audio file that's going straight in to Ardour.  And now if we close Hydrogen and play it again, we'll just be hearing it straight from the recording.  So, there we have our first bit of music that's gonna contribute to this track.  Now, what goes with drums?
      More drums!  Or possibly bass.  I think we're going to keep it simple today because I could talk about drums for a whole day.  And I'm to the going to.  Let's have some bass.  And this piece of software I want to talk about with bass is this piece of software called Helm.  It's a synthesizer that's based on oscillators and filters.  So, there are a number of different types of synthesizer that exist.  And this one's quite good for, in my opinion, it's quite good for bass lines and sort of your electronic synth sounds.  I'm afraid my laptop's quite an old one.  So, let's go with this.
      In the spirit of connecting things  that's the bit I forgot to click earlier.  I have a little  tiny little keyboard here.  And if I connect it, that allows me to start playing some sounds, hopefully.
      [sounds playing]
      There you go, maybe make it an octave lower.
      [sounds playing  lower]
      A nice thing with this, you can change all sorts of parameters all over the place.
      [sound playing longer]
      Or you can add in some noise to the oscillator.  Or you can change the waveforms that it starts with.  And then there's also the different sounds.  So, again, this is not going to be a tutorial on playing about with Helm because literally you could spend all day playing with sounds.  But that gets you to the point where you can actually start to record some other things.  Now, the recordings I'm going to make here are pretty terrible because I'm playing with a fiddley little keyboard here on the stage rather than a nice thing that I can actually play if time and those speakers are far away.  It's definitely not going to be in time.  But we're going to have a go anyway.
      [playing]
      Let's go with it that.  A slightly better version for later.  This has recorded the MIDI data.  That's the starts and the end of the notes and running through the synthesizer.  When we play this back, it will sound terrible.
      
      [playing back]
      Yeah.  I can't play this on stage.  That's fine.  That's what the stuff I prepared earlier is for.  And now we can do a similar thing with a different type of synthesizer.  In this case we're going with FluidSynth.  I'm using Helm and FluidSynth as plugins.  They do stand alone, but they're particularly helpful as plugins for the Digital workstation.  Everything is integrated.  You can choose a sound font.  This is a WAV table synthesizer.  And maybe familiar if you have played with the Yamaha or Casio keyboards in the work music shop.  In this case, we'll go for a mice marimba sound.
      And this recording process, by the way, you can do if you have a microphone you can do this with acoustic instruments or with your voice or anything else and it's just for demo purposes, I'm using MIDI instruments here.  Hey.  Here's a wonderful demo.  Why it doesn't work if you forget to plug it in.  So, we have marimba, there we go.  This will work better this time.
      [drum beats]
      Or not.
      [music playing]
      Oh, yeah, it's working.  It's just very quiet.  All right.  Never mind that.  So, this is the general sort of workflow that I tend to use for recording these MIDI tracks and/or audio tracks.  And I would like to add in an effect with some  that comes from something completely different.  A thing that you might have seen at EMF before is live coding.  Again, this is not a thing that I've played with an awful lot.  But it's a technique that definitely falls within the relevant sort of things that you can use to make music.
      So, whereas before we've seen notes from a keyboard and we've seen graphical representations with things onscreen, supercollider is environment where you type in code and that code comes out of your speakers.  So, this first line here, I can execute this first line and we get a couple of sine waves.  Those on the left will be listening to 440 hertz.  And those on the right will be listening to 600 hertz.  And those in the middle get a nice chord.
      And you can make slightly more complicated things here.  We've got a random choice of a pair of frequencies.  And if I run it a few more times 
      [frequencies playing]
      You get some random on top of each other.  Then we can move on to another effect.  This is adding an envelope to the sound so that it's changing its amplitude over time.  And we can combine stereo effects as well.  That's a pink noise sound that's sweeping across from the left to the right and back again.  But what I actually wanted to do for this to put towards this track in the end, is we're gonna make a synth.  And we're gonna play some arpeggios on it.  I'm going to slow it down so that you can hear what it actually sounds like as an individual synth.
      [synth playing]
      But what I wanted was an effect here so I'm just going to divide this by 8 and make it a lot faster.  And then we have something that sounds like this.
      [arpeggio sound]
      So, you can use the same  the same technique then to record this into a track in Ardour.  I'm not going show that now because we are running slightly short of time.  But the end result will be a load of material that we can mix together in Ardour.  And there's one final component that I want just to make this a little bit silly.  And you'll see quite how silly this gets in a minute.  I had a lot of fun with this, by the way.  This is jaunty giving the opening ceremony of EMF 2016.  How is that music, you might ask?  Let's have a listen.
      >> We don't need this, it looks nice.  It's what we're doing.  If you sit quietly, that's what we're doing.  Welcome to  electromagnetic Field 2016.
      GAVAN: You might have noticed I picked a couple of places and sliced things up a bit.  And that just gives us a little bit that we can listen to.
      >> Now, that is it, welcome to  electromagnetic Field.
      GAVAN: And then change those.  Maybe start there.
      >> Welcome to  electromagnetic Field.
      GAVAN: And you can spend a day doing this and hear something more fun and more silly.  It's what we're going to hear in just a few minutes.  In fact, less than a few minutes.  Unfortunately, I don't think Jaunty is able to be here right now.  I would love to see his face for this.  Now, this is where you see all the elements come together.  You can see in the mixing screen we've got a few effects here.  Compression here, we've got synthesizers.  Got a multiband compressor.  These are plugins that you can use within Ardour or anything that can use these plugins.  These are LBT plugins for the most part.  But also, there's the Windows standard VST which you might have heard of is the same thing.  You can use your favorite VSTs.  But since we're talking about free and open source software, I'm not talking about VSTs very much.  Once we have this all mixed, all the levels set, all the bits and pieces, the synths sorted out and a few of the tracks recorded into audio, we are ready to have a little bit of fun with all of the elements that you've heard plus a few more put together into a track.  Here's one I made earlier.  And take it away, Jaunty.
      [music playing]
      >> All right, I'm Jaunty, one of the organizers of Electromagnetic Field.  This is a huge team that's worked or over a year to build everything here.  Everything from the people who got you into the gates, the people at the side of the stage, there's too many of you.  Welcome to Electromagnetic Field very small  very small part.  Very small part.  Right, so, I'm Jaunty.  Please be nice to them.  Please say thank you.  Buy them a beer.  There's too many of you.  I might be like  is that really the best we can do?
      Well, that's far more than I expected.  Yeah.  Music on the stage.  Who has been to EMF before?  I like you the best.  There are a lot of lasers on site.  Don't look into them.  Please do pay attention.  That's correct.  Really awesome.  So, please be nice to your neighbors on the site.  We're all here to have fun.  Stop.  Stop.  I can't hear you.  Please give it back.  Please it back.  Please give it back.  Please give it back.  Give it back or I'll find you.  Oh, yes, they don't care what we do.
      [music building]
      There will be some kind  I'll make you fight for it.  I don't know what it is.  And finally, you don't need it right away, very sorry.  And that is absolutely it.  The bar is very good.  The speakers are tremendous.  It's quite a fun thing to do.  This is not a lie.  I promise.  We  what can I say?  There's too many of you.  There are a lot of lasers on site.  Do not  stop.  Just run.  We're to the done yet.  Do ridiculous things.  Collapse on the floor.  If you would like to try, please send me an email all day every day.  Please have a wonderful time.  Yes.  Finally, yes.
      Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  Uh, right, so, I'm Jaunty, welcome to Electromagnetic Field, and that is absolutely it.
      [ Applause ]
      GAVAN: Thank you very much.  I'm Gavan Fantom, not Jaunty.  This has been making music in the free and open source world.  If you have any questions, I will be outside in about five minutes after I finish packing up.  Thank you very much.
      [ Applause ]
