101 Hacks for Late Soviet Water Towers by Ben Fitzgerald.
>> Hi, everyone. I spoke very briefly at EMF2016 on one of the lightning talks. It was about sex robots. I've learned, don't compete with sex robots! It doesn't work on any level! Right, I'm half Latvian, quarter English, quarter Irish, and the unicorn is because that's who I saw Latvia when I was younger. It used to be behind the Iron Curtain, part of the USSR, and it was mystical fairy land that you hear about where everyone is equal, and you can't visit. Because it's forbidden, human nature wants that. It sounds good, everyone being equal. I was a staunch communist until the age of ten when you learn it's not that good. Anyway, yeah, miles type indicators. It's endlessly interesting. I come off as being introverted, so this is a push for me, so interest in lots of different things, so hence EMF was brilliant. In 2016, I was 40 years old. I'm probably one of the old ones here. Who else is over 40? Half of you will relate to this, and the other half can learn and take notes what you will have to come! Yes, I absolutely did not have a mid-life crisis. I did fly a Spitfire, do the Cresta run and become the custodian of a fine Latvian water tower! [Applause]. That is not a mid-life crisis at all! I don't know how much you know about Latvia, but most people tend to think of boozy weekends for stag weekends, you've got beer bus bike, and the shooting the AK4s, and partying, and all that stuff. Which is great. I prefer the deeper side of the country. Actually, there is a lot more to Latvia than - yes, partying. And this year, they had the hashtag "I'm introvert" for the London book Fair. There's a whole side of the country which they're branding. I suppose it appeals to half the peel. It's true of the nation. EMF go and Latvia, very similar things, so, EMF, rule one of hackspace don't be on fire. Rule zero is don't be on fire. In Latvia, we like to challenge that. If there is a fire, in Latvia, you will find a Latvian jumping over it. The beer here brilliant, and - few words of Latvian to learn [he speaks Latvian]. So, other things about Latvia. Yes, I have a mug to prove it. It has the fifth fastest internet in the world. I think that's an out-of-date statistic. First time I visited there, was pre any mobile phones. I had to go to a post box and have the operator connect a call and then go out and pay for it. They totted it up on an abacus. That's what I heard about from school and ancient Egypt and stuff. It was super quick, no batteries, and they're not going to blow a screen. It's now come a long way, and they've got fibre and stuff. The same mug is a bit dodgy. On the other side, the most other product in Latvia is potato. I'm not sure what the question they are asking is, but actually has indicative of how a lot of things worked in history there. Formerly in history, when the Soviets came in and took over effectively, they were invited by the Latvian government, and they voted for that to happen. It was basically - it was a choice of "vote for this or die", and they did that. I doubt there was a gun to the head. Back to the unicorn. The Baltics are very tech-focused, and you've got more unicorns per head of population in Estonia - neighbouring - than anywhere else in the world. Roll over, Silicon Valley. No-one can afford to live in Silicon Valley, I gather. If you've got a house there, you're doing very well. If you're a radio ham, here, we get 400watts, and in Latvia, you get a kilowatt to play with. Housing, I looked up yesterday, £85,000 buys you a single garage in Twickenham, or something like that. Yes. Not much. Whereas I also, so the story of this, I bot board at - I got bored at my desk, and I think the grass is greener. Let's live on a farm and have the easy life and good life and be simple. There's a website called ss.com - not that SS. It's super addictive. It's all in Latvian. Thanks to Google translate, it turns into English. Can you read this from the front? There's a part on real estate. And, I'm returning Latvian slowly. There's 445 entries for [Latvian spoken] - who space machine-learning language is bad? It these "thieves services". Good for Google! I saw what is available in Latvia what you can get for your money. So £10,433 buys you 18 apartments, plus a hectare of land which works out at £500 each. You're not going to go far wrong there. I came across this ad for a water tower. It was in the auction section. And I thought, let's learn about the auctions and the things that have attracted me about it. One, it was on the date of lay birthday.  - of my birthday. No chance of auction fever on eBay, and all that, and there's a shed and stuff as well. I read more about it. Actually, on the details, you probably can't read this, but it basically says, "Technical situation, no electricity, water, and drainage, none." It's a water tower, with no water. That tells you something about the collapse of the Soviet system that they didn't get it connected! I registered for the auction, filled in the forms, sent a deposit, and that good stuff, and then I had some time. I thought I would learn about it. You see pictures of these Japanese talks, and expected to stand the process. In the ad, it's 40 metres high. I've no idea how many square metres this is.  The Space Shuttle is 40 metres high. I had the picture of that sitting next to the tower. Yes, I can envision that. So, anyway, so, on the day of the auction, I flew over. You can do Latvia and back in a day if you want via Ryanair. It's hard work - 6 am flight out, 10.00 pm back, but you can do it. I thought I would go for a pleasant day, and all that. By the time I got to the auction house, the privatisation, they came in, said, "Mr Fitzgerald! We were wondering who was registered for the auction. You're the only person registered, so you asked EUR5, and it's yours." I wasn't ready that are that! [Applause]. Grand Designs hasn't come to Latvia yet! This was sight unseen. I hadn't seen the thing. I filled out a few forms within got a taxi to go down, and I had a look at it. So, yes, we, so what did I find? For sail sign on it. There's an open door down the side there. There is no door. I thought got to have policies. You know, coming from an IT background. Open-door policy. We will have an open-door policy. I went in. It's very my, it's in a nice area, in Jurmala, which is in the seaside. It's scary up at the top, which is good. I climbed up, went down, had a look around. I had a look at the shed, the guard house at the bottom which had a nice portrait of Lenin - or was it Stalin? I should get that right! I thought to myself, what am I going to do with it now? In the lists of 101 things, I thought 101 things with a water tower. The first thing, let's learn about it. It's incredible, when you start looking at stuff, you start seeing them everywhere. I saw the British Tower Water Tower Appreciation Society. If you only a water tower, it is free. The fact that I spent EUR5 on it was a bargain - quids-in already, waived the £5 fee. There's a lot of ways that the water tower can kill you and take care. I thought I'm going to need two lists one of 101 things to do, and one of 101 ways it will kill you which will keep you balance. I don't want to experience the 1.67 seconds of saying goodbye. I went back to do more forms, and it was the weekend of the big NHS hack. The view of the lake was me working making sure everyone was good and patched and that stuff. Also, explore the tower, and did some cleaning stuff. So I went round, and picked up litter from around the tower, and so, yes, on the 101 things to do, have parties! It looked like there had been good parties there already. Why wasn't I invited? There we are. And, but, I thought I found a few bottles inside the tower. I thought the open-door policy, nice idea but we're going to need a door because alcohol and being really high up is not good. The seaside in Jurmala is really, really nice. It's been likened to Miami beach. You see towers everywhere. On the way here be, I keep looking at them, and in the corner of your eye, I catch them. So many different designs. Next time I built back, they built a park back to the lake which is really nice. Thank you, Latvian government. I was then learning about the design and construction of it, and, interesting, so it's all modular. These are built from the Soviet system, a lot of things - aeroplanes, bridges, all sorts - all designed to be built with fairly unskilled or conscripted labour, so aircraft are maintained by that, and these are preconstructed. It's probably how many houses are done now in modules, and they're put together. They're actually some of these designs you have four walls, slightly impossible style and lined up so it won't fall over. They build them with inside in the levels, there's rebar and bonded together in the same way they use to do railway construction. It's the same equipment, and probably the same materials. But it's sort of really thick rebar that holds the weight of it. Going up, you have ladders and levels, 12 stories up, basically. So, good thing to stop and take your breath as you go. You go up to the top, and more ladders up to the very, very top. This was the bottom of the water containers which stored about 40 tons of water. I haven't actually measured it. There are two pipes that go in a tower - one for the out, and one for the in. The in one was either never connected or cut off. I found from the plate that this one on here, you can see it was built in May 1987. So, up at the top, this is what you get up at the top. I said it was scary up at the top. There is no - well, there's the rail around the side, but, if you slip, you're off, bye-bye. Some of my cousins work on windfarms, and they're totally happy at the top, which scares me even more. You can look down into the tank. They've got a ladder down there. So, yes, one of the things I learned about as well is I've been reading up, the history, the architecture, it's quite interesting, and there's a story of how the tower came - of how the tower came to be designed. In the command-economy and five-year planning, there was a meeting of whichever design bureau with Comrade Someone saying - I won't try doing the Russian accent - "We need a new design for water towers to all the stats, and what they needed." There were a group of engineers and ark architectures there taking the specs. If someone is bored in a meeting, people Doodle. It seems to be again universal, one piece of male anatomy by universally is Doodled. You don't need too many prizes for guessing. Apparently, one chap at the back was doodling, and he was noticed, he was caught, so he was caught out. What are you up, Uri? He is a quick-thinker, and, basically, a couple of of squiggles, a few lines, turned is it it upside-down, a new sign, module water tower. Let's have a look. We will show the Latvian people that they are well and truly fully part of the Soviet Union. That architect was Juris Skalbergs. I would like to meet him and ask if there is any truth in that. Who knows? It could be. He has built a whole load of buildings. It's the same case with many other architects. A lot of the buildings that people build are replaced if they are civic buildings over time, so the water towers will be his legacy. What have I done with the tower since as well? Yes, I run a radio station up at the top which was good fun. I got great respect for those people - not people, the lightweight equipment because if you have to take lead acid batteries, and antennas, you get worn out doing it. Lightweight stuff is good. I run a station. I took part in a documentary about water towers, done by couple from Oregon. In Oregon, where Jessica and Ryan come from, it's illegal to fill your car with actual. The pump attendant has to do it. Actually, from the inside, it radiates outside, and I'm organise a permanent 90 electricity supply so we can keep that going. Down to health and safety and that, and lots of learning and thinking. 
>> There are lots of other things to do with it. 
>>  What is left to do? Yes, got various things. Basically, I've got this list of 101 things. I'm not showing you everything here, but actually, because you condition people a bit. Once you get to number 70, it's really hard as well, so I welcome any ideas, but we had some ideas. What records can we break? So the - yes, with this particularly phallic water tower, what's the world's biggest condom? The record is 20 metres high which went on the statue of France. Yes, the Latvian people can beat that, definitely, I'm sure! That will be fun. It's fun with all of these things looking at what we can do. It's interesting. But there are all sorts of things. You could almost flood it and use it as a submarine escape train pad, or a sundial and calibrate it. So EMF loves fire, and Latvians love fire, and you sort of think about fires, and I thought, let's put one of these beacons up at the top, the flames. Latvia is 100 this year, so it's the 100th anniversary of the nation, big parties. There was a huge song festival. There will be a population bubble in mine months from roughly March. And we're thinking about flames, and there are things like the big thing for "hands across the Baltic" which was everyone holding hands for independence and a big protest, and the nations lining up. If you think about flames, and things on top. What is the most famous flame? The Olympic flame. There is a movement to actually bid for the Olympics in the Baltics in 2040 or thereabouts which has been interesting to get involved with a little bit. And have it with the three nations. It's fun doing these things, and looking at what can be done. We've got lots of ideas. I would be interested in knowing what else people can think of, and all that. So, yeah, yes, so, stuff with fire, and getting the power sorted out, audio installations and generally having fun. That's my last slide. So, if anyone has got any questions, please let me know. Right, let's try something as well. So, I'm lazy. Sorry, I'm lazy. Is the mic on here? 
FLOOR:  I was wondering if it is structurally sound, and how do you make sure that it is? 
>> I had that checked. If there is - yes, so the steel is pretty solid. It does need some touching-up, but the rust that you can see, I've been in there with sandpaper, and all the steel, it's really good steel. It's built to last, you get the nice shiny metal behind that. YouTube has wonderful videos of labour rust removal. If anyone has got one and fancies lending it to me, that would be wonderful! Any other questions? Those come from look at why, by the way. Those arrived yesterday. 
FLOOR:  Have you considered putting water in the water tower?
>> I have thought of that, yes. 
FLOOR:  What would be the outcome?
>> The water used to come, there's a well the other side of the lake which I think used to be connected, because it was an industrial complex behind it, so, yes, we've explored reconnecting it for reuse, but there's nothing to serve, so that's why the water company was selling it off. I was lucky because they had some of the other bigger towers, they were going to auction those off, and there was a big national outcry of, "These are too good to privatise, and stuff" so I've got one of the few. Yes. 
FLOOR:  Can you considered hiding the water tower behind a one-to-one scale picture of the Space Shuttle? 
FLOOR:   Of the Space Shuttle?
>> I haven't. One of the things I would like to do, though, is for the Soviet Union and stuff was about making things up.  Given the Soviet construction of the concrete and rebar, the amateur radio connection, have you considered turning it into a 40-metre antenna? I took, so the antennas I took up, I took up a 40-metre, and an 80-metre antenna which were G Whip antennas, and they're really, really good, single-wire ones which actually they're kevlar wire, and I'm a member of the Forest Radio Group, and the kevlar, those are banned there now because they had one at the secret nuclear bunker lately, and a tractor got caught in it, pulled over the mast and broke the tractor. The antenna was fine! I've strung one up. It will be fine to find out. 
FLOOR:  Something to add to the list of things to check? 
>> I guess, why not? Or, feel free to take your radio over. I will let you know where it is! Cool. Okay. Brilliant. I think that's it. So, brilliant. Thank you very much indeed. [Applause]. .