Adventures in Undertent Heating by Simon Munnery. 
>> Thank you, welcome. I did a low last year called Renegade plumber. Most of it was about undertent heating, and how I came to do it. Usual statutes. [Ditty played on a mouth organ.] You're good. Through to the second round. Out! That was easy. Yes, anyway. Getting old. Went to a funeral the other day. Caught the wreath! I will be doing jokes as well. But anyway, undertent heating, how I came to do that, I was at a comedy festival about three years ago, and the weather forecast was going to be camping in April in Wales, and the weather forecast was going to be -5. My wife is Australian, and, if it's under 20 degrees, she starts shivering. And I've got three daughters as well - 13, 15, and 11 - unusual names but briefly appropriate! I can sort. This I've been to a lot of festival, done a lot of camping. Is it possible to heat a tent from the outside? You can't have a flame in a nylon tent - the fumes and everything. This is what I did. I got a - I have it here. My basic undertent heating system which is a saucepan, a camping stove, a 12-volt caravan pump, which is £9.99 eBay there, and you put the saucepan on a camping stove, the pump goes to a hosepipe which goes under the tent backwards and forwards, back in. The water gets heated, heats the tent. It comes round and round until either the battery runs out or the gas runs out. I did it as a test in the back garden. Slept out in minus 2 at that stage but the tent was warm. I thought yes, I've solved this. When I got to the festival, I thought if I use a biggerer saucepan, it will hold more heat. I ended up doing standing outside the tent changing the gas canisters on the little camping stove every half an hour while frost was forming on my shoulders while my wife and children remained lukewarm. But it did work. The trick is to use a small one. I was thinking about it. I started talking about it. The year before, I done a show, and, as part of that show, I described various things I had invented, one of which was the "unbrella" - a stick you hold up when raining, because before the invention of the unbrella, there was no choice. You either got an umbrella or you looked ill-prepared. What the unbrella says is I've thought ahead but I don't care about water. It marks you out from the scum! About the undertent heating thing as well but so many people came up to me at gigs saying, "No, that's not a funny idea, that's a product!" And so I stopped talking about it and said - "You should patent it". I went on the Patent Office website. If you get the chance, don't. They say there are two ways of getting a patent:  one is with the aid of a lawyer which is prohibitively expensive - the other one without a lawyer. They might as well say go away, move to another country. Is it a product, I thought? What market would there be for it? I thought there are two markets:  glampers and refugees - people who need it, and people who don't. I thought can I improve it? Is there any way of improving it? For about six months, my mantra every morning was, "Can I make something that is better than a saucepan?" That was going round my head. The system I've got here which I will show you after this if you want is just a hosepipe but I did build a better one with sort of one thick hosepipe that went to lots of thinner hose pines because the smaller something is, the greater its surface area to volume ratio when you lose heat. If you've got a pet mouse who is cold, put a blanket over it, and elephants, don't worry. They can lose heat. Research may well back this up. I thought of Stephenson's rocket. What made it the steam-engine, instead of having one tube with the hot burning gases going through the boiler filled with water, he had many, many thin tubes, right? So I thought I knew what I wanted, many thin tubes coming through the volume of water that I wanted heated, and I didn't know how to make that. I went to a metalworking man in Bedford - I live near Bedford, not in it. No-one could do that! I asked him, could you build me this? He said steel will core rode. You want to talk to the aluminium man, who he knew. Bedford's a bit like the Wizard of Oz. I went to the aluminium man, he said, "I could build it for you but you could build it yourself out of copper." He said to solder it together. He said if have water in it, it will never get 100 degrees and won't melt. The show was called Renegade Plumber. Dring, dring. Your boiler's broken? Good! Put a jumper on! I could have been a plumber, like my father. He could have been a plumber as well. We come from a long line of men who could have been plumbers. I got to work on it with six-millimetre copper pipe. Worked out the surface area of the bottom of a saucepan. With a saucepan, the hot gases go along the base of the saucepan, and then go off. If you get the hot gases to go up through the saucepan instead through the hot tubes, so I built it. So I will show you this. It's slipped in there. That. You know, it is a prototype. It's not very good. I just used a bit of old drainage pipe which turned out to be a mistake. I thought it was pun piece, but I kept gluing it, and you can see this 13 tubes there, and, inside, there's a 12-volt caravan pump copper base plate which sits on the camping stove, and then I turned it on, and it didn't work at all. The hot gases just didn't want to go up those holes. I didn't give up. I went to Maplins - RIP - and purchased a 12-volt computer fan for £8 and put that on top. That sucked the hot gases through, and this did work. And this is better than a saucepan. But - [Applause]. Thank you. It's like I've won some award! Even though it was working, did I mention, so, instead of one hosepipe, lots of thin hosepipes coming off the hose Pope, so it loses heat better. I built that, but last year, I left it out in the winter, and the glue that was holding the pipes together sort of denatured, and it leaks, so, I've gone back to using one hosepipe. Why bother? Even as it was working, I could see drips of solder falling down in the fire, and it felt damp afterwards. I've not used it since but I can't throw it away. Like a child, or something. It is mine. I can't - anyway. If anyone wants it ... . [Laughter]. I talked to my dad, he stayed, "What are you up to?" I've been working on this undertent heating system. "How does that work?" There's a saucepan, a caravan pump, a 12-volt battery. He said, "A battery?" Like appalled. I said, "How else are you going to pump water?" Then, it just, his appalledness at using a pump to pump water. I thought is it to be  possible to build something that will pump water without a pump, just use heat directly. You could make a steam-engine but you will lose water and steam. I started thinking about it, and I designed and built this in my back garden. I haven't brought one with me because I took it part again to try to improve it. I built this. There's the heat source, the candle thing, the flame. The water in here. The V thing is a one-way valve. The water only goes one way. What happens is water here gets hotter and hotter, and hotter, and the water getting hot slightly - expands slightly. But it can't go anywhere. You get a steam closing. When water expands, it does so a thousand times. I built this, and it works. It expands, and you get a big glug. It pushes the water round back into the reservoir at the top. It can't go back because of the one-way valve, it goes round there, a big glug of water, and then this tube going down is now filled with steam. This tube going down is being heated and starts to cool. You get a steam implosion. Up get a partial vacuum formed in the tube which sucks, and that sucks it through, and we're back to square one. I built this in my back garden, and it worked - not very well, but it worked. I sat out all day watching it go "Glug ..." but slower than that. My children were witnesses. They weren't very interested! I thought is there a way of improving that? I built this second version which is similar, really, in what it is is euros voyeur goes down there, it goes down, there's your undertent heating system which comes back, and then goes a big condenser. The coolest water in the system goes around the cooling pipe to cool it better. This didn't work at all, and I have no idea why. Anyway, as I say, I started talking about it at gigs again. I was doing a gig in Sheffield, and a woman came to buy a DVD of a previous show I had done. She said, you should talk to my boyfriend, he's an engineer. He said - I looked it up online, under "steam pump" Google, steam pump. I found out about the early steam-engine that used the suction power of when steam turns back to water, it - they use it to suck water out of mines. I couldn't find anything that did the explosion followed by the implosion to try to pump water. I thought I felt so alone in the world. Someone else has done this. This should have been invented in the 17th century, and, also, I wanted to make it better but I couldn't find a way. I was doing this gig in Sheffield. This woman brought this DVD, and she said to look up thermofluidics.com. They've invented it as well. I started to write an email, "Hello, my name is Simon. I've invented very similar to what you invented in my back garden. Shall we be friends?" I never sent it. That was that, really. Any questions? Well, it works. I will just get it out the bag. You can see it. I kept thinking, "Is it possible to make something better than a saucepan?" And, yes,  I invented this which is a saucepan. It's better than a saucepan if you put this around it. It's not a product, but a bit of plastic with tin foil. If I put it like that, right, the hot gases, it is going along the bottom, and then vanishing. They go along the bottom and up the sides. This is 20 per cent better than a saucepan. Thank you. I have the graphs to prove it. [Applause]. Anyway, this is a show I haven't done for a year, and that's all I can remember of it! [Laughter]. I will just to fill in the last five minutes or so, ladies and gentlemen, I shall, in, come back from Edinburgh, been selling units my merchandise, and my book has been recently republished, and I will read some jokes. 25 years of my jokes, 30 minutes to read! What a life! Some of them are good. God is a DJ. He doesn't do requests. Sex: if you want it badly, that's how you're going to get it. Do not punish yourself; you deprive the world of its purpose. Thank you. Last last life is unfair. Most admit when pressed. Even those doing the pressing sometimes agree. But is life unfair that we need a lottery as well as a justice system? If a million monkeys were given a million typewriters, eventually one would reach the works of Shakespeare but would it be worth wading through 400 copies of Money by Martin Amis.  I do nothing without a deadline. With a deadline, I do nothing. Until the deadline is upon me, and then I panic, which is doing nothing quickly. My to go has no legs. Yet still he chews bone. How does a leg with no legs chew bones? With a great deal of suspicion, I've noticed. Look at the sea. Remember the past. Look at the sky. To manage the future. Look at the land and think of the present. And, at the most profound place where land, sea, and sky are one, there ye shall play volleyball. One more. A list of dangerous things: matches, golf balls moving at high speed, doors marked WC that have a huge drop on the other side, very heavy weight suspended above your head by a piece of cotton, microwave ovens that sing, "Come put your head inside and turn me on." Cars driven by idiots, cars swerving to avoid idiots. Cars driven by policemen chasing idiots. Policemen generally - they are dangerous. Universally all agreed that the police have an impossible to do. Nevertheless, they insist on attempting to do it. This leads to frustration. Scissors that move of their own accord and attempt to cut your genitals off. Moving on. The electric guitar, like making love, is much improved by little feedback. Completely ruined by too much. He who lives by the sword shall die by the sword. Indeed, likewise, he who lives by the pen, he who lives by the fax machine and by the word processor all that die by the sword. Only he who lives by the task shall remain immune. If you like to purchase a DVD, a postcard, or a book, I'm selling them out there. Thank you for listening, and have a lovely afternoon! [Applause]. 