Dark-Dark Dark-Matter Matter-Matter by Nicolas Angelides  
... there are three distinct ways in which we try to investigate the nature of dark matter. On the top, we have dark Matter-Matter matter interactions. We look for way that dark matter interacts with normal matter that are non-gravitational, so on smaller scales. And, lastly, we look at ways matter interact with itself that may produce dark matter. In either way, the observable, and what we have access to is the real matter stuff, and, in each category, we are trying to infer from what we can see the existence of dark matter. Starting from the top, how do we go about trying to see dark matter matter interactions. - imagine the idea that dark matter partials when they collide, they might produce light, or they might produce high-energy particles like neutrinos which we can detect. How do we look for those places where they interact. We're looking at really dense areas in the sky. That's why we point telescopes at the centre of the galaxy, so the centre of the galaxy is a place in space time where gravity's really strong, things tend to pull towards it, and, as they do, they speed up. It's as if things are free-falling towards there, they're all heading towards the central spot, and, once they're there, they're - their energy is extremely high. We point telescopes there as shown here on the slide, we have a Chandra telescope, which is a giant X-ray antenna. It's trying to see flashes of light from the centre of the galaxy that can't be attributed to anything else. This is an exo search which I am  implies that you really have to know what is happening around the local area that you're studying, so it's a quite checking job to be able to distinguish whether or not something that was observed can be attributed to known physics, or whether it is dark matter causing it. In the other alternatives, dark-matter interactions, we look for the two that can interact directly top to do this, we take advantage of the fact that dark matter is so weakly interacting that it goes through everything. It goes through the entirety of the planet that would stop many other particles, so, what we do is take huge very, very clean, very, very radio pure detectors - in this case, the LZ experiment, which is a seven-tonne target of liquid Xenon cooled to low temperatures and purified so much that there are minute amounts of radioactivity in it, so that radiation coming from the surroundings, the universe, the atmosphere, does not affect it. So, by lowering the amount of interaction this device has with its surroundings, by placing it in such a clean environment, we can become sensitive to such weak interactions as dark matter would be prone to. In this detector, we have hundreds of cameras pointed into this volume, and they're just expecting to see this instance where a collision occurs within the material, and it is of a specific signature, and a specific magnitude that could only be attributed to dark matter. This requires, as I said, extremely low background material. Often, what has to be done is sourcing of ancient titanium, purification through extremely long processes, but also very, very low-noise electronics. Then the final way in which we try to quote dark matter is using dark matter interactions. As I mentioned previously, dark matter at some point was the part of the whole. At some point, it was interacting with everything else in the universe. What we know is that was very, very close to the beginning. When temperatures and pressures were so high, that it was inevitable for dark matter to come into contact with real matter. So, one way to try to force it out, and study it, is by simulating those conditions. The large Hadron Collider simulates the energies and pressure that were present in the early universe by smashing particles together at extremely high speeds. As this is done, extremely high energies are released and multiple other types of particles are generated. Then what can be done is looking at the output of such a collision using a detector such as the Atlas Detector, and, sifting through the data, trying to look for inconsistencies. You can't really look for something that didn't leave a signature, but you can look for things that don't make sense. If a dark matter particle is produced within your detector, that would result in you observing some sort of physics that is not standard, so that would result in missing energy from things just not adding up to the correct number by adding - by adding the effects together, one can say with confidence whether a dark-matter particle was produced or not. So, in conclusion, this is the general approach to studying dark matter. Something so elusive that is essentially making fun of the scientific community trying to study it. Something that we know is there, we know a lot about it, yet we can't really study it in a way that would allow us to prove its existence, and study its features. If, in the future, we do manage to prove, and we do in some way manage to interact with it, I'm not sure whether or not it could be used for something quite so exciting, so, every time a new scientific discovery's made, everybody accepts and expects, and anticipates the applications it might have. In the case of dark matter, because of the difficulty in its handling, we wouldn't really be able to utilise it for information transfer; we wouldn't be able to use lies it for energy transfer. But we can use it to study extremely early periods of our universe, and, if possible, because it's composed of matter, maybe one day, we can even use it to produce energy, but I assume that could be very far in the future. Right. So, this is all I had to say. Thank you very much. 
>> We've got time for a couple of questions if anybody has got any? 
FLOOR:  So, pardon my ignorance, but it seems like from the start of the description that it is an effect almost like the rotation occurs because of an effect, I assume something like big bang caused planets or a mass of universe to move, right? You mention we detect things moving away from each other faster than the case. If I simplify that and go to my childhood physics, if I think of something I've thrown, look at that in a snapshot of time and look down earlier to a normal parabola, the sooner I look at it, they're still accelerating or moving further apart than we expected to, so what makes us infer that we haven't just got the calculation wrong of when the big bang took place or when the effect took place that we see this momentum or motion taking place at a greater rate than what we currently see. Does that make sense of what I'm trying to ask? 
>> The question is regards with whether or not we can say with confidence whether the observations do represent an expansion of the universe that is currently happening, and not an earlier instance. 
FLOOR:  I guess so. If you take the rotation of the objects around, say, a black hole, whatever the mass was in the middle, and I kind of got the impression that what we are saying that the rotating faster than we would expect them to be, and, so the gravity of the piece in the centre must be greater to hold them in those positions. Is that correct? 
>> Yes. 
FLOOR:  If I think of a spinning top with some strings and masses waits, if I use great force to spin that, then I might see a greater acceleration initially than what would normally - normal out over time. Ten seconds would be quite slow, but 1.5 seconds after I use a lot of energy to start the rotation might be a lot higher, so I might see the similarity. My question really is, what if the energy being applied to objects in the universe moving away from each other, or bodies rotating around each other, the energy's greater than our calculation is, so we see them moving faster than originally anticipated? 
>> It's always for calculations to be wrong. What we can do is keep cross-checking all the measurements that we have. What I can say is that, through multiple independent measurements, the inconsistencies remain. A huge milestone in science confirmed our trust in general relativity, which is the groundworks for most of this, most of these concepts are built on. We can have a longer conversation later over a drink.
>> Thanks very much. 
>> There's the somebody behind you? 
FLOOR:  As I understand it, dark matter is kind of a fudge factor, right? We don't know what it is but we know there must be something there. There must be this much of it for the numbers to work out against what we observe, right? Then you talk about this other fudge factor we've got which is dark energy because one fudge factor wasn't enough, right! So my question is why are there two fudge factors? What is it that makes us these two distinct things, dark matter, rather than dark energy, one thing we don't know about. How do we distinguish those two fudges? 
>> That's a really good question. What motivates really the distinction between the two is the understanding of the very different effects they each have, and the scales which they are acting. Dark matter would be holding galaxies together, so, in our own galaxy, there's a halo of dark matter. Its effects can be quantified to be very local in the way they filament, so a lot of the pictures that I use in the background display simulations that are created to represent observation that is we see,, and this agrees to a great enough significance that we understand that dark matter must be a physical fluid in the universe. When it comes to the idea of dark energy, the expansion that we see and can study does not follow the same trends, so dark energy behaves in different ways with respect to tearing the universe apart rather than holding it together, which is what dark matter is doing. The two are really hard to compile into one theory. There is no standing theory that I know of that tries to solve this cosmological type of fudge situation using one quantity, or one parameter.  So that's - if that satisfies your - 
>> Yes, that gives me an idea. 
>> Perfect. 
>> You talk about the main way you know about dark matter even being there is from gravity, and we also know, because relativity doesn't predict quantum mechanics and vice versa, they both must be wrong at some level or incomplete at the very least. How well is it proven that it is something physical and not a correction on relativity itself? 
>> To reiterate your question, do you - how do we know, it's necessary to introduce more matter and not a subject of just correcting relativity to the scales corresponding to the problem?
>> Correct, or unknown bits of relativity that vary more in distance. 
>> There's actually a huge chapter in dark Matter known as "modified gravity" which studies these effects. What it tries to introduce is the idea of scale-dependence on the way gravity acts. It's usually not the most graceful of theories because it is trying to introduce many more parameters than simpler models, so they are often not presented as the most elegant ones. In addition, most of them were killed recently with detection of gravitational waves, so the speed at witch gravitational waves travel, and the frequency at which they're observed would not be the same given modified gravity was in effect. They're heavily disfavoured.  
>> Thank you very much indeed for a very talk. [Applause]. 