Lesson 101:  Making Fashion Tech & Human Organs by Rachel Konichiwakitty.
>> Hi, everyone. We're ready to start the next talk. And I'm very happy to introduce Rachel who is talking to us about making fashion technology and human organs. When I read it for the first time, I thought it was making it out of human organs, but it's not! Over to you, Rachel. [Applause]. 
>> Hello, everyone. Sorry about the technical delay. Okay, so, today, I decided to talk about what it's like making - well, as you guys are very familiar with the internet - making a ... of the internet. To begin, I'm going to introduce myself. I am - my name is Rachel. I'm known as Konichiwakitty, which is also the branding for my fashion pack. I am a maker, hacker, fashion engineer, stem cell scientist as well as a mental health advocate. So, why am I speaking today? I like to talk to you about making wearables, what are they, and why I'm making wearables in terms of fashion technology. I also like to scare you or give you a view into the future of medicine, using tissue engineering, which is the creation of organs. To share my experiences in doing both these things. So, first of all, making wearable fashion technology. The reason why I've designed this presentation in a way that on how to get started is I often get a lot of questions asking people - people asking me, "How do you get into it?" I'm doing something completely different normally which is stem cell research. What is wearable technology? Wearable technology is a blanket term for electronics that can be worn on the body as an actressy or part of material used in clothing. This means it can be accessories specifically designed to fit on your body, or some sort of electronics attached to textile which access a carrier for these electronics. Health tech, a lot of us know of, and fashion technology are the two categories. Health tech products are such as fitness trackers which help you keep track of the number of steps, how many steps you've climbed, heart rate, calories burned, and provides your information and connects it to the internet  internet so you can find out more about it. Fashion tech includes clothe with expressions. Fashion tech doesn't believe in attaching a mobile phone or a laptop to your body because you will still want to use your phones or laptops for ease of accessibility.  Fashion tech believes in creating a second skin in terms of enhancing a user's experience. So, some examples of fashion tech include clothing that can reflect your mood, or it can enhance your experience if you are wearing it in a theatre and it sends vibrations to your bodies. I've decided to try fashion tech rather than health tech in terms of wearables because I believe that fashion tech is a lot more relatable to a lot of people, in the sense that with health tech, you have to understand what the information provided to you means. You need to put in an effort to understand what is provided. With fashion tech, you have to make a conscious fashion decision every day. You wake up in the morning, and you think to yourself, "Am I going to wear this T-shirt or that T-shirt? With these trousers or this skirt go with this skirt or top or not?" So it relates to everyone. Here I'm going to show an example of some of my personal fashion tech projects. This is a floral necklace I made with pixel rings and controlled by the Raspberry Pi and the RaspIO hack. So the purpose of this is really just to express myself. Why should I wear a basic chunky necklace when I can do something like this that not only expresses myself but creates a lot of interest, a lot of discussion, and also encourages other people to try to do more with the accessories? Following that, another project that I've made, so this is one of the first accessories that I've made which uses a Raspberry Pi Zero. The purpose of this is again to have fun, to express myself, and also, this has encouraged a lot of people - I want to say girls or women, but there are people other than girls or women specifically who like this kind of aesthetic, and it encourages them to try electronics or basic programming. So, how to get started. Again, a lot of people ask how do I get started with making this when I show my pieces at exhibitions? So, first of all, the first thing that is really, really important to get into making or just learning a new skill is to be inspired. So, when I look for inspiration, you know, I did a little bit of a Google search, and, when I search wearables it returned a bunch of fit bits, and VR headsets which is not what I was looking for. I did more digging and found images on Pinterest that attracted me. For example, this dress which Cutecircuit who displays various lights. It is a brand that has also designed clothing such as the Twitter tress for people like Nicole Shozinger. There is this artist called Anouk who designed these spider-like projections using servos and 3D printing for when people invade her personal space which I think is very useful. It can also involve the type of technology used to design the material. For example, CNC laser etching and 3D printing. Once you're inspired, you're more likely to look into it even more. One of the things I did that really help me know more about electronics and coding is by attending events. And at these events, it helps to ask a loft questions. For example, I think there are a lot of you in this crowd who crowd who have an understanding of electronics, coding, programming, and hacking. To use terminologies that I can look up on the internet. Some places that have been useful for me to learn a new skill is just forums and chat rooms. The things with forums and chat rooms is that it is helpful if you know what to look for. If you know the right terminology which in my case, I often don't know what to look for. So, I turn to social media. With social media nowadays, it's easy to take a photo of your problem. If I built a problem and there is white smoke coming out of it. I'm like "white smoke" searching on the internet. That's not helpful. If I take an image of the problem and upload it on Twitter, I can get so many people help me, using things like #makershelp things like that. People can reshare it, retweet it, tag someone else who might know better. And lastly, what really helped me was customer services. There is a lot of customer services online such as platforms like Twitter. For some reason, these guys, they don't sleep! They have the person behind the account as usually a regular person checking Twitter all the time, or they have it on their phone, so, when it beeps, they immediately answer your question. If they are not able to directly help you, they would know of someone specialised to do so. What was helpful in trying a new skill is kits. There are so many kits out there that can be specified to so many different things. There are kits that are specifically for basic electronics, how to light an LED, kits for soldering, kits for craft electronics for programming. Most kits that teach you to solder teach you how to solder a flat PCB. To this kit when ask how can kits get started and how can they create accessories that reflect the aesthetic, this is something that I created to show that. On top of that, when you buy something, if they have an online page, there's a very good chance that they provide a lot of detail, otherwise you can also probably find on YouTube a lot of things, and a lot of variations from what you've purchased, and, so go from there, and that way, you can create your own aesthetic. So, moving on from that, I'm going to teach you how to make human organs! [Laughter]. So I'm doing a PhD that involves growing eyeballs using stem cells.  People ask me:
"How does that even work?" So, how to get started. So what is tissue engineering? Tissue engineering is the use of a combination of cells, engineering, materials and methods and suitable growth factors that help you create your ideal organ. The aim of tissue engineering is to create an organ that's personalised to you, that will overcome any need for organ donors, and overcome problems like organ rejection. So, how can we do this? So, first of all, we need stem cells. We would get these stem cells from patients who want to grow their own organs. Secondly, we need scaffolds. What are scaffolds? Scaffolds are basically the house the cells attach to in order for it to grow. Other things that will be needed are growth factor - basically food for the cells to survive - vasculature, a network for food. What is important is published and unpublished literature, and the reason for this is because research is a race against time. If you create something that hasn't been published, you want to put it out as fast as possible. When someone has published that, and, if you're working on the same thing, you want to use that as your steppingstone to push you ahead of that person so that you can publish the next thing. Unpublished literature refers to things like collaborations. Lastly, the goal of tissue engineering, again, is to create off-the-shelf organs so one day you'll be able to go into a shop and pick and mix. I want a little bit of this and that, and I want to put that in my liver because I'm a heavy drinker - that sort of thing! [Laughter]. So, to give you an idea of what are stem cells. So, stem cells are come from any part of the body. Stem cells are basically the baby stem cells that create an embryo. In the early days, stem cells will  were harvested embryos. Right now, we can obtain stem cells from just a simple skin biopsy of a patient. So this is very non-invasive. Using a simple skin biopsy, we then give it a lot of growth factors to make it think that it is in an embryonic environment. When it thinks it's in that environment,  you then go against time and reverse their age. From a mature brain or lung, or heart cell, they go against time and become an embryonic stem cell. Using this embryonic stem cell, when we study human development, we're able to target what sort of growth factors cause it to develop into a brain, a heart, or a lung. We use the same growth factors, apply it to the embryonic stem cells, and we have our organ. But it really isn't that simple. If you grow a mess of cells, it's probably going to form a tumour, probably won't form the shape you want it to. This is where we interviews scaffolds. This is an image of a decellularised liver and a decellularised large intestine. Decellurisation is the process of using various enzymes to strip an organ of its cells and DNA. Once you stripped it of its cells and DNA, it loses the natural pinkness that you normally see and gives you this transparent structure. This transparent structure acts just like a scaffolding of a house. When you're building a house, you're going to need scaffolding to hold things up. So this scaffolding, which is the - yes, the structure of the house - when you add cells to it, it's like adding bricks to a house. These cells will then specialise into different things. Like a living room in a house, for example,. And that will be a specialised heart, or a brain. And so on. So, moving on to things like sci had been hub, what is it? There are a lot of people out there who are not subscribed to various journals, and also a lot of these journals are only accessible through people who are in academia. I don't think that should be the case. Like, nowadays, it's so easy for us to find information, but we do want to be well informed and not just reading off some news which is not properly cited or referenced. So Sci-Hub is a place where people go to get these journals free, so there's a couple of issues with this website, you know? There are legal issues, and things like that, but various more have popped up. So, if you want to be well informed, just look up a very good journal, a very good review, and, from that, a good review will teach you everything from scratch. You don't have to be an expert in order to get started. So, that's it for you guys. If you want to go home and create your own organs, all you need is a scaffold, some of our own stem cells - just a simple skin biopsy, and then you are basically ready to go. You also need a bit of some financial help, but, yeah. Figure that out! So, just to sum everything together. I would like to talk about the obstacles and lessons I've learned through making. So, how many of you have heard this phrase? "There are no more original ideas". It's been said so many times, and I've heard it more and more recently just because the internet is so accessible. It's so easy to find something that you've made that looks similar to something someone else has made. Does that actually make your idea unoriginal? I don't believe so. Because ideas stem from problems. We are a lot more related than we think. We have a lot of the same problems. If you have the same problems, you are probably going to come up with the same ideas. Again, that doesn't mean that your idea is unoriginal. No-one's going to say, "Hey, you copied my problem." So, your ideas are yours, your ideas can be similar to someone else's, but they're original. But, if you look up how to solve a problem, and that thing inspired you to create something of yours, it's important, very, very important, to credit where credit is due. The first thing you can do is ask - ask how they want to be credited. Somme people don't want to be credited, I just put this up, and I want to stay anonymous. That's really important. More importantly, you should ask whether it is okay to use whatever it or share whatever it is you want to share that belongs to someone else. Secondly, inform them where you're going to use it, just because you credit someone, it is not okay for that person to turn up somewhere and realise that your information's just everywhere, and it's not been said. That's really important. Secondly, I think it's really, really important to say thanks. When you do say thanks to someone for their idea, it really encourages them to do some more, to want to contribute some more, for the information that is already readily available. Lastly, when you say thank you to someone who perhaps made something and selling it and inspired you to make your own, say thanks because it encourages and promotes small businesses which, again, with the age of the internet, it's easy to struggle, it's easy to make your own thing rather than purchase something an artist has made. So, I get this question a lot, so I would like to address it. A lot of people ask me, I do stem cell research. Why am I doing fashion technology at the same time? It's completely different. Growing eyeballs and next blinding people with lots of lights! I do this because I want to live the best life that I can. This used to be my life. A lot of you here love your work, and, like me, I feel very thankful to be doing something that is work but I am passionate about. But the thing is that, for a lot of us, well, myself specifically, speaking from  experience, I loved it so much that I didn't think I needed anything else. I was like, you know, I'm doing life-changing research. No other of my needs actually matter. When you're so passionate about something, it is very, very easy to neglect all your other needs. So, I suffer from burnout over something that I love. I also had severe anxiety and depression, and I have no idea where they came from. Being the scientist that I am, I did quite a bit of research into mental health. Which is also work by the way! And then I found out that life requires balance. You know, you think you might not need it, but it makes life so much more colourful. After a full day of work, I go home, and I'm like, "Oh, my God, I have this idea I want to make." I'm not going home, "I'm so tired, I have had a really long day." I'm skipping home, "Yes, I have this idea. I want to make it real." And this is why I've incorporated making into my life, and why I make and why it's important. And, I think that brings me to the end of my talk. Thank you very much! 
 ... 
>> If you grow them until right environment, so, from a mass of cells, it starts to form a little ball. So, eyes are pretty special. We're already there. We're trying to make sure that the cells we are working with are functional.  Any more questions? 
>> Great talk by the way. I think I saw cell kits online. How easy is it to run a business, and your making, and the PhD work, and is it worthwhile and sustainable? What is that side of it like? 
>> Okay, yes, I am - so, as I said earlier, I'm selling those kits which helps you create - does this light up? It's meant to light up! But, it helps you create one of these little cat ears. Yes, I do run a business. It's tough, because it's just me, so I am the marketing, the packaging, the posting, the everything, the design, and all that, it's just me. It can be difficult, but, with everything being online, it's a lot easier. You don't have to have a proper shop. When orders come in, you can just say that everything's going out on this specific day, and people are willing to wait for your product if it's something that they really want. And just so you know, there is a Cyberpunk marketplace leader on in the evening, and I have a shop there, and, if you want, you guys can check it out. Any more questions?
>> How close are you to actually implanting the eyeballs in people? 
>> It's actually happening right now. A lot of the research with tissue engineering, a lot of times, it's happening to patients who are in extreme circumstances, so, it's a trial, but it has been very successful, so, for my Masters, my lab and I created a tissue-engineered oesophagus, and the follow-up of the patient is very successful, and this patient is a child, so we were amazing to see that the transplanted organ was growing with the child. . 
>> Do you think there will be a point in the future where your hobby crosses over with your career, and you kind of like have technology incorporated into the  organs. 
>> I get that question with a lot. I don't want them to cross! It's why I'm doing two very different things. I do get that question a lot, and there's a possibility that the fashion tech side of things might grow bigger, and that might become part of my career, and so I will have to find a way to build my own lab to grow my own organs, I guess! 
>> Okay, so, should the problem why an organ is being replaced, if it is genetic, wouldn't the replacement organ also be prone to the same problem? 
>> The answer is no. As we know, the problem organ donors is not only because there - it's very limit ed, there's a long queue for organ donors, and it's limited in the sense that you have to match the DNA, so, the reason why we are engineering organs in the lab is because when you strip an organ like so we can use scaffolds from animal organs or an organ that is no longer freshly harvest the from a cadaver, these organs are stripped of its cells and DNA, so the remaining extra cell matrix is just a matrix that has no properties that will cause organ rejection. When we see this extracellular matrix with the patient's own cells, we are essentially growing the patient's own organ. 
>> That's what I meant, like if the patient is predisposed genetically to a disorder, would that same disorder be in the do not or.
>> This is where gene editing comes in. One of the things I do in my lab is gene editing. We have - so I have patients with congenital blindness. So, in order for us to address this issue, and to grow their own eyes, we have firstly to correct it by using CRISPR CAS9 which is a gene-editing tool, and we try to correct that gene that is producing the wrong thing, and, through that, once it's corrected, we again have to test whether the cells work functionally, whether the eye cells can detect light, and then, before transplanting, and, yes. . 
>> You talked about pick and mix and gene engineering. How do you address the morality of custom-building organs and potentially people being able to custom-build characteristics they particularly want within their stem-celled organs? [Off mic].  Sorry with the technical issues. So, in terms of pick and mix, we would like to change certain things depend objecting the lifestyle of the patient, so, and we would change that in terms of growth factors, so we will have to study it better in terms of human development. I hope that answers the question. We can speak more. Thank you, everyone. 