Science Magic, Magic Science by Ian B Dunne 
>> Can you hear me? 
AUDIENCE:  Yes! 
>> That's quite alarming! Hello, Glastonbury! I know it's not really! I love the echo. I ought to introduce myself a little bit. I'm Ian B Dunne. I get to go over the country, and occasionally other countries as well, going on about science, and stuff. I'm a recruiting Sergeant, going to schools and festivals trying to get kids interested. This is a stripped down version of a talk I often do. It's secondary level, and, for the general public. I call it Science Magic, Magic Science. I saw a guy a couple of years ago did the Magic of Science and droned on for half an hour, and one guy pretended to be dead to get out the room. It was that bad. None of the talks are like that here at all. That's exciting as well, isn't it? My talk is about bits of science that look like magic or use as conjuring tricks, and a lot have. Imagine it's a couple of hundred years ago and I said to you, "I have magic powers." You would probably go, "Go on, then, prove it!" I would Spey you see this ordinary bar of metal? You can buy one like this on your way home. You're familiar with this metal called aluminium. However, due to the fact I've got magic powers, I can do something unusual to it. Hopefully. Come on! [Singing sound]. I can make it sing by touching it. I can make it sing and scream. I can do it for hour, after hour, after hour, after hour until your little brain goes all runny! And comes out of your ears! Because I can make it go, and only I can make it stop! [Singing sound stops]. It's easy to do. It's not a magic trick. It's a science trick. After an hour's practice, you'll be able to annoy the whole family. Your dog will be lying on the floor going "Ow" because it makes his doggy brain shake inside his boggy head. When you hold it in the middle and rub it, it resonates. Different lengths give you notes. People have made musical instruments out of this. I like the noise this one makes, but then again because I can't hear all of it. As you get older, bad things happen, and one thing is you go deaf. And lots of of the noises this makes I can no longer hear but young people can! [Laughter].  Which is great. It means I can torture kids, which is some compensation! I haven't got long, so I will be quick. Ooh! This is similar. This is a Tibetan singing bowl. You make it sing by running the wood around the edge. If you go on the internet, you will find lots of websites will tell you that is a really healing noise. I thought it's just a metal bowl! Will others do it? The answer, yes, they will. I came across these two in a charity shop, silver plated but made of brass, really. You can use a wooden spoon handle for that. This will make a very - come on. [Ringing sound]. A healing noise. And this one being a different shape makes a different very healing noise. [Wobbly ringing sound]. If you rub them together, they make a beautiful. [Waver ing sound]. Now you can your whole family just by using cheap jumping. It is immensely satisfying! Over here. When you play the violin, the bow resonates over the string, and you get the lovely music. I won't play the violin at you because it would contravene your human rights. I'm rubbish on the violin. Instead, I will play this rather lovely saw. I used to use it for the sawing the lady in half trick but not allowed to to it any more. I know most people play sitting down but testify play standing up. [Wobbly almost human-like sound].  Or ... [even more wobbly sound.] That's good at Hallowe'en, when you get the trick or treaters on the door.  "Trick or treat and I will smash your window." If you stand there like this, they all run away screaming! [Laughter]. Brilliant. Lowest note is about here. The highest about here. [High screech]. 
AUDIENCE:  Ow! 
>> Do you like that? I won't be cruel. I will be quick. It's easy to play the saw provided you're long enough to bend it. It's a lot bendier. This is still sharp but this is actually made for playing. There's a label on there, and it says "Sandvik Strayed various." And there's a picture of somebody playing the saw. The person in the picture it looks to me they're not wearing think clothes! I think that's a bad idea, don't you? One twang, and it will be "Ahh!" At hospital, "How did you do that?" "I was playing the saw with no clothes on." You'll be there a long time! You can go back down there. This - it's downhill. This is actually a musical instrumental  musical instrument as well. It's called a theramin. When I turn it on, something will happen. Nothing happens. My theramin. Oh, ... [squeaking sound]. At least you're working. Every time you set these up, they're different. Oh, dear. [Farting sound]. Oh, that's worse. I've broken it. [Lower farting sound]. When I get nearer to it, with a bit of luck, it will make a noise. [Low creaking sound]. Lots of crack he will. You can - crackle. [He  plays a tune]. This one does pitch and this does volume.] The guy who invented this was trying to make a metal detector so he could use one as a car alarm. You put one on your car, and it goes] high and low electronic sound]. Here's an impression of a car.] Sound of a car accelerating and changing gear].  Little birdie. [Bird-like news.] Mosquito. [High-pitched wobble sound]. People can make it  sound like it's talking. I can just about imagine hello. [Mimics human voice. V sadly, not used a lot in music any more. Used to be used a lot in the 1950s in some of the great science fiction films bike The Day the Earth Stood Still and the hero walking along the long, dark corridor, where at the end is the laboratory, and, in that laboratory is the monster. Hopefully, it will go like this ... [descending scale and electronic wobbling sound]. So it gets to the end of the corridor. He puts his hand on the door handle, and it goes like this. [Sound gets higher]. The monster gets higher, [electronic "hello"]. If it is your birthday today, this is for you. [Out-of-tune Happy Birthday song].  Thank you very much! [Applause]. It's warm up here. I had better move him. I ought to introduce you to my little friend here, but this is my little cat. A robotic cat called Cat. Imaginative name, isn't it? If I turn him on, he will do something. Are you alive? [Sound of a cat meowing]. What are you doing? Going to make a noise? [Meows]. I trained him to count. Not yet! How many fingers am I holding up? Not that one? How many fingers? How many fingers? One. More than one. Come on. Come on! I'm going to reprogramme you with an axe. Come on! Come on! We haven't got all day. You're just sulking. I'm holding up three fingers. You can see the three fingers. [The cat meows]. One, two, ... well done! Are you going to behave or do you want to go back in your box? Do you want to go back in your box? [Neeow!]. Are you going to behave? Come on. You're purring, then. All right. I'm going to leave him on, because ... I'm never quite sure what he's going to do, it's half the fun. Oh, another - for my next trick, I'm going to do this. Here I have a classic magic trick. I'm going to attempt your magic tricks. I'm rubbish at them but I will have a go. An empty bowl. There's nothing in the bowl but a few billion air molecules having a nice little bowl. I put the bowl on the table and I take the lid off and there's stuff in there. If you can't work out how that works, get professional help! This is a chip pan, you can - you're supposed to put pigeons in. I put rope in mine. It leads me into my next trip called the cut rope restored. I will cut the rope in half and magically draw it back together again. I need a brave volunteer to check it is one piece of rope. Could you check this one piece of rope for me? Please do not eat it, or tie anybody up. Do not strangle anybody. All that sort of thing. Convinced it's one piece of rope? May I have my rope back, please. Chuck it back over here, please! Chucky, chuck, chuck! I'm drowning! I'm dead! Well done. Right. There's one enter. I will go back over here now. Oh, there's one end. There's the other end. I place them - are you still alive? I place them in both hands. I take the middle. Place the middle in the same hand because I have no-one to help me. I need to find my scissors. I'm not afraid to let you touch the scissors - health and state of, you see. They're pointy. For all I know, you're not allowed pointy. You might go, "Pointy! I like pointy! Ahaha!" Cut the rope. At this point, I need to say, does anybody know any magic words? Good, you were list penning. Abracadabra was an interesting. No-one knows - abracadabra isn't Arabic. I want you to say your favourite magic word. One, two,  nothing rude from the back, all right? One, two, three! [Crowd shouts out words]. This is where it goes horribly wrong. What I'm doing now by the way is the third most important thing you need to to know as a magician, technical called "wasting time". They do it a lot. Hopefully the magic of science, science of magic, cut a piece of rope, and magically put it back together. Exciting, isn't it? "Can I have my rope back, please?" I don't know if I got away with that. Let's have a look. Yes, all right, kitty. Now, if I was a proper magician, which you've noticed I'm not, I wouldn't tell you how I did that. I will tell you. I lied to you. I didn't really cut it in half, I just cut the end off and tied it around so it looks like a knot, people say, "Hold on, you showed us two pieces of rope." If you think that, your own brain is lying to you. That's how psychics get away with their nonsense, by the way. I put this little bit in my pocket. It went like that, and the rope is going over there, and this hand is going ha-ha. Magic tricks work, get you to look the wrong way and waste as much time as possible. In case you're wondering, that goes in there, and then that goes in in there! Another quick magic trick before I do something electrical. Here I have a beautiful mysterious, and strange hat. What do magicians pull out of hats? Rabbits. Good answer. Better than the kid that went, "Er, broccoli?" There is something under the hat. I will introduce you properly in a moment. Here I have my beautiful hat. I need someone to check there's no rabbit in the hat. Can you check this bunny-free zone. No bunnies in there? Not even a single bunny rabbit. Over here. I place the hat on the table, I take my trustee metal bar. Hello.  There was a rabbit in the hat, if there was, it's a boneless bunny. This is honestly how it's done, all right? Oh, look, there's a rabbit in the hat. Rubbish, isn't it? Obviously, it's not a real rabbit, and you should never hold a real rabbit in its because, it is simple and it is because THEY'RE HIS EARS. If it was a real rabbit, he would be in agony now and all sorts. Run! Run! You are all right downhill but rubbish uphill. The reason I showed you the rabbit, you will have understood, if I showed people a rabbit like this 200 years ago, people would go, "Oh, my word, I don't like the look of that. That looks like evil magic. That guy looks like a witch. Let's burn him!" It's not evil, magic, no, it's science harnessed for the good of man kind. Would you like to give him a little stroke? Arrrgh! Back over here now. Walking uphill. Right. You go there, killer bunny. I put you there. Hello. Still there. Oh.  I ought to introduce you to Annie. It's not a real human skull. I'm sure it's no surprise, but I've got a 3D printer. I've built another one, in fact,. She's called any which has nothing to do with the fact it's called my mother-in-law's name - nothing! I printed her, and it took about 30 hours. I've articulated her so I can use her as a * inventory to him equivalent dummy. "Hello, Annie." "Hello". "Do you want to go to a party later?" "I hate parties because I've got no body to go with!". Come on! I don't like this one. This is a new circuit this one. She's going to copy me. "This is a new circuit I put it in" let's do the proper one, shall we in are you having a nice time? [Skull repeats what was said]. "Are you having a nice time" "Yeeees!" "Do you want to go back in your box?" You can introduce it to people as well, and go hello. [High-pitched evil laugh. ] [Screams]. Don't fall over! [Cat meows]. They've got the same central nervous system, so they do talk to each other. I will use this strange and expensive glass of water on which I will put this strange and expensive postcard on which I place these strangely inexpensive things. On top of which I'm going to place these three staining and expensive eggy-weggies. The idea of this trick is using not one but two of all three Newton's laws of motion. I will pull the postcard. The eggs should fall, unbroken, into the glass. That's the idea. I used to do this. It always worked. Then I started doing it with three eggs. It doesn't always work. I find the stress terrible. I will show you something quickly first. I need - what am I looking for? Come out.  For my next trick, I will use this - and I can find a decent one - good grief, where have they all gone? I'm going to use this incredibly terrifying balloon. Okay? They all work by electricity. Electricity's the nearest thing I know to real magic. Before I do this, the standard safety warning: don't plug yourself in. The electricity going through the lights here is easily enough to go through the room. I won't prove, because you would be dead, and I would have to leave the country again in a hurry again - very embarrassing! Especially sure I don't need to explain to you that there is electricity everywhere, and I will try to take it out the balloon. Not by plugging it in. That would be stupid. You can do it by run rubbing on your hair or a cat but they don't like it. I'm going to do it with this cloth. Hopefully, the cloth has taken off electricity of the balloon. It will stick to my doo-da. There are two explanations why it sticks? The sciency one it has removed electricity off it. You end up with a force holding it on. The non-sciency one, it's being held up by a little fairy! You can believe that if you like. Still alive - good! This is not a light sabre, it is a bit of plastic. When I rub this with the same cloth, this gets too much electricity. The balloon hasn't got enough. With a bit of luck, I now have a bit too much, not quite enough, a bit too much, not quite enough, bring them together, and hopefully something interesting will happen. Not pop, float! Is to the balloon is being attracted to the rod. The balloon's going, "You're an attractive rod. I think you've lovely. Give us a kiss!" With enough electricity, you could make people float around the room. The slight problem is they would explode. It would look good! He's floating around the room. Back! Er! There's a bit in my hair. You go down there! This is a Victorian invention called a Whimshurst machine. If I turn the handle, it makes lightning! [Evil laugh]. I know what you're thinking, is he going to put his finger in there? The answer is no! He doesn't like pain. Now, for the next bit, you're going to have to excuse me. I'm going to be kind to the AV people, I'm going to take my microphone off because it's going to - 
>> Keep your microphone on! 
>> You heard him. You can't sue. This is a Van de Graaff generator. Normally, they are small and rubbish. This is the third I've ever seen, and it's mine. A big rubber band goes round. You don't need an electric motor. You can make one powered by a hamster wheel. It would still work. This is insulated. You might think sparks. Can you do anything else? Yes, you can. This is snaky,  electric snake. Attack the rod! He doesn't care if it is the rod or my hand. He will go for the nearest thing. If I'm careful I can get him to follow my hand. A kind person goes, "What happens if you touch it?" Would you like to see what happens? Okay.  Oh, if you're ever worried about getting an electric shot, the electrician's trick is to put it your hand in your pocket. It will hurt but won't kill you. Argh! Look. [Kissing sounds]. This is high voltage, low current, which is why I can do this. The problem is it's a bit sweaty in here. Bite me. Come on! On a good day, I can get bigger sparks than that. You're thinking does it hurt? I don't know, I can't tell any more! [Laughter]. It's the only fun I get these days, high-voltage electricity - and beer! If this was mains electricity, my arm would be on fire. It would be good from your point of view.  "That was so funny when he set fire to himself." If I put my hand on, I'm charging up, but it's going really quick. Come on, out you come. I can't see what I'm doing. Let's try this one. Oh, better.  Come on, Squidy. These people can't hang around for you. Squidy! Rise. Is that it? [Laughter]. That was rubbish. Call yourself a tissue paper life form! I pulled his leg off! I don't know. Strangely enough, they're easy to make. Let's try that again. Hup! [Laughter]. Attack! This is an ostrich feather.  I'm not sure this is going to work in here. Oh.  You're charging up. On a good day, you can get them to fly. You're not going to do it, are you? Because you're rubbish. This - come on, out you come. This is a bit of loo roll. In short supply at festivals. With these, it's handy for your Jedi training. "Use the force!" Back to me! [Laughter]. If your loo-roll ever attacks you, run around screaming. These are pie tins. No, I didn't eat all the pies. You can get them empty. Here come the flying saucers. Sadly, I am no longer allowed to electrocute living human beings. Sorry, but no. I've got my beautiful assistant. I have Stunt Barbie.   [Laughter]. See how that hair is affected by my finger. Because there's terrorist going through space between me and Barbie. That is a Van de Graaff generator. I've got a Tesla coil which was cute. Tesla was a great inventor. Better than Edison, wasn't he? This is a cute little one. This produces about a million volts' worth of electricity, turning off about 300,000 times a second. I want to show you what that looks like.  I that on. What? Work! What has happened? Oh! Can you believe it? A battery's gone. That's not going to work, is it? There we go. Amazing. Hit things. So, a million volts turning off 300,000 times a sending looks like this. [Musical electronic notes playing Twinkle Twinkle Little Star].  You see, if you recognise this one? Four seconds late. One, two, three ... [electronic Star Wars music].  Only Seth can do that particular trick. In case you're wondering, it is a lightbulb. This is a kit. You could get one of these and build it and absolutely terrify your cat. Bargh! Oh.  I wonder how I'm doing for time. I had better do this, though. But first this! I am not trying to hypnotise you. I do not want you to spend all your money in a big pile by the door, no. I want you to stare into the hurt into the coil of doom. You might start to see colours, red, green, blue, and then again, you might not. If you're thinking of looking away, don't, because, by now, your brain should be about cooked. So, so, look at my head. Last last. It's good, isn't it? This is an effect called the Waterfall effect, noticed by an artist when he spent hours at a waterfall. It's called by the billions of brain cells in your head being lazy. This time, look at the person next to you. [Laughter]. I've overrun. Okay. I can tell you a lot of interesting places to go to, and, frankly, I could do with a beer, so ... . I will finish the trick. Three, two, one ... . Duck! Duck! I will carry on. La, la, la. Hey! [Applause]. Ladies and gentlemen, you've been an excellent audience today. I wish all my audiences were as lovely as you, but on behalf of myself, my duck, bunny rabbit, my skull, and the beautiful Barbie, thank you very much for listening. Thank you! [Applause]. I've got to put it all away now!.