Sex Robots - The Truth Behind the Headlines by Kate Devlin
>> I'm happy to introduce the last talk of the evening. Kate Devlin is talking about sex robots! [Applause]. 
>> I like to think you're clapping me and not the sex robots. The organisers say there may or there may not be demo sex available for volunteers. You will only find up if you sign up for a volunteer slot! [Laughter]. Three hours might get you a go! It's not entirely safe for work but I'm keeping it fairly clean. This is a run-through of the headlines of the past couple of years. So about four years ago, I started researching sex robots. Because it seemed like a fun thing to do. I was in the pub after a conference. We got drunk and talked about where AI could go into the future. I've been working in AI and HCI for a number of years. This seemed like a Brave New World to explore. At the time, it wasn't being taken seriously. Every time I said I work on sex robots, I get a lot of academic eye-rolling.  "That's not a real subject." It turned out to be a real subject, and a popular one. You try getting funding for it - it's impossible. Two years, and talked to EMF Camp about the start of the work, and, since then, since 2016, I've written a book on it which involved a year of in-depth trawling through the information ever. It's been fascinating and fun. Along the way, I kept encountering headline after headline after headline, and despairing at some of them. I'm going to share them with you and explain why most are completely wrong. It starts with "ex-sperminate". Sex robot festival banned for being too extreme is coming to Britain this Christmas. This was in 2016. There was the second animal Congress of Love and Sex with Rowe bots, and due to be held in Malaysia. The Malaysian police got wind of this and were not happy. A conservative country, and unsurprising they weren't happy. They decided to move the conference to London to - should I name the university? Move it to City University but City didn't want it, were worried about the reputation. At the time, I was at Goldsmiths - [single cheer from the audience.]. Goldsmiths is incredibly progressive about these things and that stuff it's renowned for. When I said is it okay to hold a conference on sex robots, they went, "Yes, of course." They weren't in the slightest bit fazed. We sent out a press release on the Friday. Top tip:  never send out a press release on a Friday. It's hard to get it retracted over the weekend when people make huge errors, like reporting there's a "festival" where people can have sex with robots! [Laughter]. We had to phone them up and say it's not a festival, and, no we don't have any robots. We're talking about the technological, ethical, legal aspects of this. We held the conference. There were about 50 academics and about 40 journalists that turned up. It was absolutely great. Really nice because actually the journalists pitched in. Everyone got involved. We had loads of good debates. By teatime on the first day, we had eight stories in the national press. I was getting phone calls from Germany, and the Netherlands. By and large, it was reported really well. The Mirror's tech team did a good job. The one that surprised me. By contrast, the most egregious were the Express. Boo! The Express don't like the truth to get in the way of a good story, likewise, The Sun. We had "robot phwoars" which is one of my favourite! This "Sex robot shocker. Almost half of all men will use one" said a survey of 260 people. A lot of extrapolation going on in the Express. The people who did the survey, even they were survey, this is a survey of 260 people, this is an initial survey. So, it was interesting to watch how it was reported because of course it got completely out of hand, and all sorts of things were coming out. I talked at the conference. I did a keynote at it.  I talked a lot about privacy and security, which came up as "sex robots could reveal your deepest perversions to deep strangers". There's some basis for this, so there's been several smart-sex toy hacks over the past few years. The Wee Vibe is the most famous. A multi-million dollar out-of-court settlement because We-Vibe were recording every minute of use of the vibrator. Not recording settings and patterns, but things like vaginal temperature. Which they said they needed to make sure that the device was functioning properly. It's not that weird to be monitoring your devices and getting information sent back if you're a manufacturer. The problem was they hadn't anonymised it, and linked everyone's data with their email address that they had registered on the app with - yeah! Hence the multi-million pound settlement. There is ought to introduce couple of similar ones. The ... dildo, with a camera on the end which, you know, there's a - people want that! It's a product people buy! No kinks here, mind. It was widely reported that you could hack into the video feed, and you can see the pictures from this camera. In actual fact, there are a people out there doing White HAT hacking on sex toys. People like Brad does Internet of Dongs project, says, you can, and you can be within three metres of the device to do it been you might as well look through the window! We know there are security and privacy issues. You sign up to use things, you tick the terms and conditions boxes, but when it comes to sexual data, people are much more wary. Jimmy Lewis has a wonderful book on this called Queer Privacy. She had a vibrate or on tour to show you can have control of teledildonics, which is an interesting project. We know if that data falls in the wrong hand, it can be problematic. We saw Stamford coming out with the AI Gaydar data telling if people are gay by a flawed study. There is a lot to think about around privacy and security.  I then said foolishly in my talk, "What about people who are marginalised, for one way or another, perhaps they are not having the fulfilling sex lives that they want to have. Should a we not use sex technology maybe to enhance their lives" the Express translated this as, "Sex robots should be put in old people's homes says expert." I love this because they call me an expert! It's great! I stand by it. I stand by it. I did a lot more work on this when I was writing my book. There's the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing showing that people have active sex lives in their eighties and nineties, people wanting to have sex, being unable to because they're put into nurses homes, infantilised, taken away, perhaps separated from a long-term partner, or a partner has died. They don't have much privacy. There's a lot of - there are not locks on the doors. Sometimes, there are windows in the doors. The carers don't want to know about that side, and, sure, there are issues when it comes to consent around things like dementia. That's another case entirely, but there is a need in many ways for devices and for sex technology, and not just for sex but intimacy as well to be extended right out across many groups. I think older users is one of them. Then, about a year later, along came Grace and Franke, and they were designing vibrators for women with arthritis. I thought this is great, this is what should be happening. This intrigued me. Again, the with the Express, "End of sex, scarily real sex robots replace women as men can't tell the difference." Oh, come on! I mean! They're not that dumb! Then the Mail not to be outdone, "Sex between husbands and wives will only be for special occasions because robots will satisfy everyday needs." I don't know who these experts are that are predicting it, because it wasn't anyone at that conference. The sub headers here was fears teams could lose their - fears teens could lose their virginity to robots. Noel Sharky didn't mean it like that, sake you could have these absurd quotes. Of course, the Mail - this idea that humans will be replaced by robots is a very natural fear. It is a dystopian fear that we all have. It is about loss of agency. It is about this worry we're going to be replaced and automated. As for not being able to tell the difference, between women and sex robots, I would just like you to look at the evidence. Last last.   -- [Laughter]. I don't think we're in any danger yet of mistaking them. On the left is a sex robot known as Roxy. She was one of the first models come out. She is supposed to have different functions, like different modes, so she's got "Wild Wendy", and Frigid Farrell" and this kind of thing. Roxy gets a lot of flak, and she's a bit rubbish. She doesn't really exist. She's pretty much vapourware. The guy that - I have to be careful careful because he's quite litigious - the guy said who is producing them said he has not produced a model to sell one. The - people time and time again have tried to find an example of this robot and never managed to get a demonstration. The model one is the first commercially available sex robot today. It was released in April. I'm gendering already by saying "she". She's called Harmony by Abyss Creations who jibing RealDoll. She has an animatronics head but stationary from the neck down. I went to see the workshop where they make these. I went there expecting it to be horrifying because it's a pornified hypersexualised not very good representation of women, but I saw crafted works of art. But, in terms of the AI, she has an AI personality. It can stand alone as an app, so now, you can go and I think, $20 for an Android app that is essentially a conversational AI that's actually not bad. You can tweak her personality. It's got a good user interface. The UX is pretty good on it.. you can have her being flirtatious, sexy, caring, loving - whatever. And, so, this is the state of the art. This is where we are at with this. It's only just being made. They're about $10,000, and you basically get a head that you can put on a sex doll's body. I've got a video I will show you in a second of that. The one on the right, this is Samantha, a robot that's been in the news a lot as well, made by Serge Santos from Barcelona. They were building versions of these in his garage. He's sold 25 of these in the last couple of years. He's worked well on the AI. It's not bad. It's got interesting responses going on. He's trying to build it so that you have to woo the robot. You have to be courteous to her, and you have to arouse her in order for her to respond. He's quite interested in the or in the idea of reciprocation in the robot. Whether or not that works is another thing. This is Harmony. I'm hoping the sound will work because, when you hear her voice ... . Maybe not. "I can't wait. I've got a special surprise for you." She's got a Scottish accent! It's really strange. [Laughter]. I will play it again.  [In a Scottish accent] "I've got a special surprise for you." It's - this soft, Scottish accent. That's the sculptor who set up RealDoll in the video there. He said he had chosen a lot of text-to-speech voices before settling on the Scottish one because he said it sounded the most interesting, and the warmest that he could find. There is another version as well, Solana who has an American accent. She's just been released too. They are also bringing out a male version. Most of the dolls, the sex dolls, the love dolls they sell are predominantly female-bodied dolls, and mostly sold to heterosexual men. There are occasionally men who buy them, and gay men buying them. You can build them to your specs, you can customise the genital is that you want. In this case, it's the head that has the animatronics, modular!  So, that's what I meant there. The Roxy, True Companion robot. There was a lot of talk in the news about this idea of allowing men to simulate rape with this robot. Would it lead to increased sexual violence? I spent a lot of time looking into this, and a lot of different studies, and it's unfortunately the same way we see with a lot of things. There is evidence to suggest both sides. It's pretty much similar to the computer games and violence argument, so people say it will lead to increased violence; other people say there's absolutely no evidence of it. We can see that same thing happening as well. You see it around internet porn accessibility, too. It is the same thing. We just don't have the evidence. To my mind, the evidence says that, given the extensive access to pornographic material online, it's unlikely there's a proportional rise in sexual violence, but there are changes to social acceptance. So we have to look at what the boundaries are for that. So there are certainly things to keep an eye on, and maybe be concerned about, but in terms of this idea that having sex with a robot will lead to increased sexual vine website I just don't see that at all. In fact, the people I talk to, I talk to a lot of the doll owners, and pretty much every single one of them was very respectful and reverential of their dolls. They dressed them up, they treat them really well, give them personalities and back stories. And far from being isolated and lonely, they've formed a community where they have become friends with other doll owners, and they meet up, and they hang out together. It is community-build rather than anything else. I think they're very much a maligned community where people think this is something incredibly dangerous or incredibly perverted, but actually, it doesn't seem that way at all. Now, the big story from the past six months to a year was that the Samantha robot was molested at a trade show, and this was really kicked off a lot of discussion about the same sort of thing around sexual violence. I went to find out what actually happened. It turned out that the creator of Samantha had taken her to display at the trade show. It wasn't a sex show, an electronics trade show. He had her sitting there and said to people, you can touch, see what it's like. So they did. If you put something on display, you tell people they can touch it, they poke, prod, and like that. It's fragile material. He said himself it takes a while to learn how to handle these. So it did get damaged, yes, but the newspapers reported it as an assault on the doll. When, actually, it was pretty much like putting a museum object on display saying, "Yeah, go ahead and touch it." You're going to get damage. There was a lot of hype there around something that was not the case. There is a dark side to a lot of this stuff that has not been fun to look into or write about. There's a lot of worry that what the big questions, what happens if someone makes a child-like version of these. Currently, there have been something like 123 arrests or seizures in the last year and a half of people trying to I am port child-like sex dolls. It's not legal to possess them in this country. It is illegal to import them in an archaic importation law on obscenity. There are people who say they should be banned completely. Some say perhaps it could be used in a therapeutic setting. We don't have any evidence either way. I would be inclined to lean towards regulation because this isn't something that mirrors a consensual relationship in society, it's something much darker that involves exploitation and vulnerability. So, there have been studies in Canada around using virtual reality to see whether or not sex offenders are rehabilitated by putting them in virtual environments to test, whereas you couldn't do that in real life. That's shown promising ways of checking rehabilitation, whether or not we can put a sex robot, a 3D product into that is another something else to look at. The people who do those tests have suggested that would not be a good idea. There are this idea that China's disturbing sex robot factory. These aren't factories, they're workshops. It's not large-scale production at all anywhere. There are dolls that are created that are smaller in size and certainly could be mistaken as being childlike,. It is pretty grim. Then we get to incels. I'm laughing because it is so grim. I spent a lot of time trawling through incel forums. Following the attacks, there were lots of opinion pieces came out, what incels need is sex robots. If we redistribute sex, we will have a safer environment - that's just bullshit. The idea that you can distribute something like sex is really weird. It's not a right, it's more of a privilege. But the idea that you can give someone a robot, I looked on these forums, and people are saying they were self-report ing, it would be great if we had the perfect woman who was robotic and served us in every way. They basically wanted a programmable woman. If you give people that are misogynistically unhappy, would it cure them of their misogyny? I don't think it would at all. There is a lot of coverage of those things. Toby Young chipped in with his take on it, his usual doing way of doing that, here's what Toby Young needs is more friends. [Laughter]. I think, I can see the sort of well-intentioned thing we will have a robot which serves this role in society. I don't think this is the place to do it. Essentially, this is by and large the whole market is pretty much a gimmick in my opinion. It's a niche, small gimmicky market. I don't think it will change society or relationships. I think it is very interesting, but it is not going to have mass impact on society.  Back in July, sex with robots may not be healthy, says new study. We didn't say that, but everyone says it's not going to be healthy. Basically, what it said it's not proven. There are a couple of medical doctors had looked through the literature to say we can't find any evidence of anyone benefitting having sex with a robot. Yes, spent four years doing pretty much that. There's no evidence of it. We are completely unsure what's going to happen. What I would say about sex with robots is there are currently two groups of people who are interested: there are the people who the sex doll owners, the people who buy high-end, upscale, high-market sex dolls, and the people who want that companionship in a human-like form. The people who, if that robot or doll was to turn into a human would be really happy. It's a Pygmalion story - those groups. Who are interested in it from an engineering perspective. Quite a few of those. I think it is really interesting engineering-wise, and there are the people who have the fetish, from - basically, it is a kink, and the kink is that they are machines that they're robots. I still think it's very, very niche. I don't think that this is going to happen, so I don't think that - they will literally fuck us to death! This came out of a conference paper, a paper clip maximiser what happens if you can't switch it off and it just keeps going and going! So there were happy headlines too. Don't worry about them. They won't ruin sex. That's probably the most realistic headline but doesn't grab you the way some of the other headlines do. But where it went from this, so the more I looked into it, the more I thought why are people so worked up about this? This is not something realistic at all. The interesting thing is that sex robots have come from the lineage of the sex doll. The sex doll has been around for years and years. The earliest reports are like 17th century. Sex toys on the other hand: they are much more interesting, been around for 30,000 years in many different forms. We have stories, legends, myths. We have evidence, we have paintings, carvings, statues, sculptures. So, it's interesting the way sex toys have evolved, because up until the late twentieth century, they just weren't mentioned. Very taboo. It wasn't until Sex and the City showed an episode with a vibrator that it suddenly became more open where you could talk about it more. The whole point of that episode was to shame Charlotte into getting a boyfriend, that it wasn't food enough that she relied on a sex toy. But it broke boundaries in that people began to go and buy them. The interesting thing about the vibrator was that it was a rabbit vibrator. It didn't look like any that had gone before, which were either genital replicators, or a Hitachi magic wand. It came out of obscenity laws in Japan where you weren't able to create replica genitals. We saw an interesting branch where it moved away from the realistic and skeuomorphic and something to the abstract. That captured my imagination. We have so many cool materials now, why aren't we doing something with those, and pushing the boundaries of what we can do with the sex technology? Lots of really cool sex start-up companies out there too. If we can take the idea of an embodied sex robot and work that into a sex toy, and we can make something immersive, something you can hug, touch and respond, there are cool things it can do without looking human. The human thing is really a bad idea for sex robots, first, becauser awful at making humanoid robots - we just can't do it. Secondly, they take up a lot of room. You've got to find somewhere to store people. And they're expensive. They're not convincing. Why can't we do something more interesting? Also, we don't want to go down the whole road of objectifying with a reductive stereotype of a female body. Two years ago EMF Camp to the shock, I announced we would run a sex-tech hackathon. They did, because they did most of the work. It was so much fun. For two years - I had this vision it would be ten people in a room. They were like, so, 100 people in a room. They did. It was phenomenal. Hopefully, there,ing I'm going to announce it again on the stage. Hopefully, there will be another one. The headlines that came out of that were much better. We got some really interesting coverage, and we were covered by New Scientist, by Elle magazine, by the Guardian, by the Observer, the Independent. This whole idea that we could take the technology and build something customisable, personalisable, and try and find something that goes away from the idea of a humanoid sex robot and towards something that fosters intimacy - not just sex but intimacy - expand teledildonics into a realm where it's more immersive and wearable. It's been really, really good fun. The first takeaway is never read the tabloids, but you don't do that anyway! The takeaway is when you see a sex robot headline, you can guarantee someone is being hysterical somewhere, there's a whole load of moral panic going on, because there's nothing there. Of course, there's some interesting things that we need to think about. What does it mean long-term for people? We've been human for millions of years. We're very, very good at getting it on with other humans, and that's not going to stop any time soon. We're completely safe. So, yes, I went and wrote a book on it where I basically debunked the hypes, and now I'm going to try and sell the book and no-one will want to read it because it debunks the headlines. I say that as I'm about to prompt you to buy it! [Laughter]. It does go into a lot more detail, and you can get a lot more detail. Because I haven't even touched on the ethical arguments. There are a lot of those. I do have concerns. I'm not like we should go and build sex tech left, right, and centre. There are concerns around the ethics, and what this means particularly in terms of sexism, and objectification, particularly in terms of who has access to this? What are the legal things around it. Why are we fed a particular narrative about the sex robot? Why is it all the fell fatale. Why are the male robots killing marshes that have a redemptive heart of gold? There are stories being fed for so long and they affect our perception of where technology will go in the future. That's been an interesting thing. There's a lot of work going on at the moment of narrative in robots and AI because it does matter. It does shape what we think, and it helps us decide how we're going to design things. But I just want to say, in the world of sex-tech and intimacy and technology, it's wide open - not supposed to be a pun! There is a whole world out there where we have incredible materials to do really cool stuff with, and I think we can use it to enhance relationships, be it to get away from this idea of some mono hetero normative relationship, where it is a man, a penis and a vagina, and there must be an orgasm. It is a cliched and narrow view of sex. We can enhance and mediate relationships through technology and that's a good thing ultimately. I would say that technology is a good thing and not fear the sex robots and just really do better. Thank you!  [Applause]. I think we get to do questions. Because no-one is coming on the talk after me, if you have any questions, I'm happy to answer. This is the coolest microphone ever! 
>> So the humanoid sex robots are very definitely on the robot side. But when you get to things like kind of teledildonics or semiautonomous sex toys, where do you say the boundary is between sex toys and sex robots? 
>> Those are questions what is the question between a robot and a sex toy. That's hard to determine. You could have - are there kids in the audience? Can I use the words "fucking machine"? Teledildonics, there's an automation there. People are using sex robots to mean the humanoid form ones. To my mind, it's a robot. If it performance a task in an automated way - performs. I know robots don't have to have a degree of AI. 
>> Earlier on, we listened to a talk about a gentleman who was discussing hacking lightbulbs, and you touched on it previously with sex toys that had been breached in some way. In the highly likely event that early sex robots will end up being breached, and seeing some of those fearmongering headlines, do you think that could lead to people becoming more afraid, not only because are they going to ruin a relationship, but also because is everybody going to know? 
>> Yes, I was sort of hopeful that people see this that they're getting more cautious about security and privacy, and there was an MP for central Newcastle who is an engineer wrote an article for the Guardian who wrote is this that will make us be more careful about privacy when she wrote about the sex-toy hacks. They have put some - the Samantha robot deliberately isn't connected, has no connection to the internet of things, so for that specific purpose. So, sorry, was there another part of your question. 
>> It was just whether or not that would make the general public more afraid. 
>> Yes, I think there is - it's really strange to see what the different reactions are to sex toys in general. I think a lot of people, there is a general ration al gap, but there are a lot of people reticent even to engage with the idea of a sex toy, smart or otherwise. I think there are a lot of people kind of 20s upwards that are starting to do more and more really cool things in sex tech but I think the older generation is lagging behind on that.
>> Thank you. 
FLOOR:  Do you know if there are jobs for tasting the tea, and tasting wine, are there jobs for jobs for testing sex robots, and, if so, what is the criteria? 
>> There are loads of sex-toy tester jobs out there. I don't know how you get into it as a career. But I can tell you, if you start researching sex tech, you get sent a lot of sex toys. [Laughter]. It is a perk of the job! 
>> What about the robots as well? 
>> Not the robots. I've been offered a robot head. I have not yet got it. Hopefully, I will obtain one. I want it for sort of talk purposes rather than another purpose! Thanks very much! [Cheering and Applause]. 